arXiv:1406.3396v2  [q-fin.PM]  2 Oct 2014Factor Models for Alpha Streams
Zura Kakushadze§†‡1
§Quantigic/circleRSolutions LLC
1127 High Ridge Road #135, Stamford, CT 069052
†Department of Physics, University of Connecticut
1 University Place, Stamford, CT 06901
‡Free University of Tbilisi, Business School & School of Phys ics
240, David Agmashenebeli Alley, Tbilisi, 0159, Georgia
(June 12, 2014; revised: September 3, 2014)
Abstract
We propose a framework for constructing factor models for al pha streams.
Our motivation is threefold. 1) When the number of alphas is l arge, the sam-
ple covariance matrix is singular. 2) Its out-of-sample sta bility is challenging.
3) Optimization of investment allocation into alpha stream s can be tractable
for a factor model alpha covariance matrix. We discuss vario us risk factors for
alphassuchas: styleriskfactors; clusterriskfactorsbas edonalphataxonomy;
principal components; and also using the underlying tradab les (stocks) as al-
phariskfactors, for whichcomputingthefactor loadings an dfactor covariance
matrices does not involve any correlations with alphas, and their number is
much larger than that of the relevant principal components. We draw insight
from stock factor models, but also point out substantial diﬀe rences.
1Zura Kakushadze, Ph.D., is the President of Quantigic/circleRSolutions LLC, an Adjunct Profes-
sor at the University of Connecticut, and a Full Professor at Free University of Tbilisi. Email:
zura@quantigic.com
2DISCLAIMER: This address is used by the corresponding author fo r no purpose other than
to indicate his professional aﬃliation as is customary in publications. I n particular, the contents
of this paper are not intended as an investment, legal, tax or any ot her such advice, and in no way
represent views of Quantigic Solutions LLC, the website www.quantig ic.comor any of their other
aﬃliates.1 Motivation and Summary
It appears to be a natural tendency that the number of investab le alpha streams3
growswithtime. Intheoldendays, alphas, whichcanbethoughtofa ssetsofinstruc-
tions for taking predeﬁned positions in underlying tradables at spec iﬁed times, were
built “by hand”. Nowadays, many thousands of alpha streams can b e datamined
in an automated fashion. With that comes an “embarrassment of th e riches” of
sorts – there are too many alpha streams and comparatively too fe w historical ob-
servations. As a result, making predictions about future perform ance of these alpha
streams becomes challenging, not only in terms of out-of-sample st ability, but also
computing the alpha covariance matrix based on the alpha stream tim e series – the
sample covariance matrix is badly singular, precisely due to too few ob servations.
Asaresult, allocatinginvestment into alargenumber ofalpha stream s,i.e., com-
puting optimal weights for such allocation, becomes nontrivial. Even if one employs
the simplest optimization criterion and maximizes the Sharpe ratio of t he combined
alpha stream portfolio, one runs into an issue: this optimization requ ires inverting
the alpha covariance matrix, which is singular. And even if one someho w regular-
izes the covariance matrix, it is not all that stable out-of-sample. T he question we
ponder in this note is how to approach this issue in a systematic way.
We look to history for insight. When the number of underlying tradab les –
stocks – became too large, one had to deal with a conceptually similar problem. To
reliably compute a sample covariance matrix for stock (daily) return s, one would
needaprohibitively largenumber ofobservations(tradingdays),4evenforauniverse
of 2,000-2,500 tickers. And even if that much history existed, going back a decade
or longer makes little sense for many practical applications, becaus e the relevant
time horizons are much shorter, and many strategies are much sho rter lived. A way
aroundthisdiﬃculty istoemployamulti-factorriskmodel,5whereoneassumesthat
stock returns have some intrinsic speciﬁc risk, which must be measu red empirically,
plus factor risk, which is a linear combination of the underlying risk fac tors,6whose
numberFSismuchsmallerthanthennumberofstocks NS. Thecorrelationsbetween
stocks then are attributed solely to their exposure to these risk f actors, so the oﬀ-
diagonal elements of the stock covariance matrix are determined b y theFS×FS
factor covariance matrix, computing which requires many fewer ob servations than
computing the NS×NSstock covariance matrix, and it is also expected to be much
more stable out-of-sample for a suitably chosen set of risk factor s.
Onecandoessentiallythesameforalphas–build factor modelsfor alphastreams .
3For a partial list of hedge fund literature, see, e.g., [1]-[20] and references therein.
4There is always the issue of what to do with new tickers that have little to no history. This
is not what we refer to here.
5For a partial list of factor model and related literature, see, e.g., [21]-[60] and references
therein.
6Examples of such risk factors are momentum, size, liquidity, volatility , growth, value, etc.
(style risk factors), exposures to (sub-)industries (industry r isk factors), principal components
(“beta”-like risk factors), etc.
1Out of thousands of alphas one may construct, many are closely co rrelated to each
other for a variety of reasons, including how they are constructe d. However, there
arealso substantial diﬀerences between alpha factor models ands tock factormodels.
The purpose of this note is to set forth a framework for construc ting factor models
for alpha streams and discuss various approaches and intricacies a rising therein.
One additional motivation for factor models for alpha streams is tha t, when
a number of alpha streams is traded on the same execution platform , allocation
weights7are allowed to be negative. Furthermore, if trades are crossed be tween
diﬀerent alphas, portfolio turnover reduces [101, 102, 103], fur ther complicating
the weight optimization problem. With these additional challenges, th e investment
allocation problem into alpha streams becomes rather diﬃcult to tack le for a general
alphacovariancematrix,8especiallyoncelinearandnonlinearcostsareaddedand/or
optimization criteria beyond maximizing the Sharpe ratio are consider ed,9but can
be tractable if the alpha covariance matrix has a factor model form [105, 106].
The remainder of this note is organized as follows. In Section 2 we set up our
notations. In Section 3 we discuss optimization for singular alpha cov ariance matrix
via itsregularization andhow it reduces to a (generalized) weighted r egression in the
singular limit. In Section 4 we set forth the framework for factor mo dels for alpha
streams. We discuss style risk factors for alphas, cluster risk fac tors based on alpha
taxonomy and associated issues, and principal component risk fac tors that arise in
the regression limit of Section 3. We then discuss using underlying tra dables as risk
factors for alphas and how to compute the corresponding factor loadings matrices.
ConcludingremarksareinSection5. AppendixAdiscusses someaspe ctsofcapacity,
which is one of the style factors one may choose to use. Appendix B d iscusses some
aspects of constructing the factor covariance matrix and speciﬁ c risk.
2 Deﬁnitions and Setup
We have Nalphasαi,i= 1,...,N. Each alpha is actually a time series αi(ts),
s= 0,1,...,M, wheret0is the most recent time. Below αirefers to αi(t0).
LetCijbe the covariance matrix of the Ntime series αi(ts). Let Ψ ijbe the
corresponding correlation matrix, i.e.,
Cij=σiσjΨij (1)
where Ψ ii= 1.
IfM≪N, which is the case in most practical applications with N≫1, thenCij
is (nearly) degenerate with M“large” eigenvalues and the remainder having “small”
values, which can be positive or negative. These small values are zer os distorted by
computational rounding.10
7For a partial list of portfolio selection literature, see, e.g., [61]-[100] and references therein.
8Even if it is made positive-deﬁnite via a deformation (see, e.g., [104, 102]).
9E.g., maximizing P&L with volatility bounded from above.
10Actually, this assumes that there are no N/As in any of the alpha time series. If some or all
22.1 Alpha Weight Optimization
Suppose we wish to allocate investment Iinto our Nalphas. We need to ﬁnd the
alpha weights wisuch that
N/summationdisplay
i=1|wi|= 1 (2)
where the modulus accounts for the fact that some weighs can be n egative if the
alphas are traded on the same execution platform. For the sake of simplicity, let
us assume no transaction costs – they are not important for point we are trying to
arrive at here. Portfolio P&L, volatility and Sharpe ratio are given by
P=IN/summationdisplay
i=1αiwi (3)
R=I/parenleftBiggN/summationdisplay
i,j=1Cijwiwj/parenrightBigg1
2
(4)
S=P
R(5)
The simplest weight optimization criterion is to maximize the Sharpe rat io:
S→max (6)
If the covariance matrix Cis nonsingular, then the Sharpe ratio is maximized by
the following alpha weights wi:
wi=ξN/summationdisplay
j=1C−1
ijαj (7)
whereC−1
ijis the inverse of Cij, andξis a normalization constant ﬁxed by (2).
3 Singular Covariance Matrix
WhenCis singular, one can regularize it by deforming it: C→Γ. Such regulariza-
tion can be parameterized as follows:
Γ≡C+ǫ∆ (8)
whereǫis a regularization parameter (Γ →Cwhenǫ→0), and ∆ ijis a nonsingular
symmetric N×Nmatrix.11Next, we discuss what the inverse of Γ looks like.
alpha time series contain N/As in non-uniform manner and the correla tion matrix is computed by
omitting such pair-wise N/As, then the resulting correlation matrix m ay have negative eigenvalues
that are not “small” in the sense used above, i.e., they are not zeros distorted by computational
rounding. For the sake of simplicity, here we assume that there are no N/As.
11More generally, there can be a vector of regularization parameter s, and ∆ need not be
nonsingular for Γ to be nonsingular, but such additional intricacies d o not change the conclusions
drawn herein, so we will keep things simple.
33.1 Deformed Covariance Matrix
LetV(a)
ibeNright eigenvectors of Cijcorresponding to its eigenvalues λ(a),a=
1,...,N:
C V(a)=λ(a)V(a)(9)
with no summation over a. LetUbe theN×Nmatrix of eigenvectors V(a),i.e.,
theath column of Uis the vector V(a):
Uij≡V(j)
i (10)
Let Λ be the diagonal matrix of the eigenvalues λ(a):
Λij≡δijλ(j)(11)
with no summation over j. Then
C=UΛUT(12)
Note that, because Cis symmetric, Ucan be chosen to be orthonormal: UTU= 1.
LetJbe the subset of large eigenvalues λ(j),j∈J. LetJ′be the subset of small
eigenvalues. (Note that J∪J′={1,...,N}and|J|=M.)12Let (no summation
overj)
/tildewideΛij≡δij/tildewideλ(j)(13)
/tildewideλ(j)≡λ(j), j∈J (14)
/tildewideλ(j)≡0, j∈J′(15)
I.e.,/tildewideΛ is obtained by setting the small eigenvalues in Λ to zero. Let
/tildewideC≡U/tildewideΛUT(16)
Since the small eigenvalues are dueto computational rounding, we c an use/tildewideCinstead
ofCin the deﬁnition (8) of Γ:
Γ≡/tildewideC+ǫ∆ (17)
Note that/tildewideCis exactly singular.
However, ∆ is nonsingular and can also be decomposed as follows:
∆ =X Z XT(18)
whereXTX= 1 and
Zij≡δijvj (19)
is a diagonal matrix of the eigenvalues viof ∆, which is assumed positive-deﬁnite.
12If some alphas were exactly 100% (anti-)correlated, then |J|would be smaller than M. For
the sake of simplicity, here we are assuming that no alphas are exact ly 100% (anti-)correlated.
43.2 Inverse Γ
Note that
Γ =X/tildewideΓXT(20)
/tildewideΓ≡ǫ Z+/tildewideΩ/tildewideΩT(21)
/tildewideΩ≡XTΩ (22)
and Ω is an N×Mmatrix (recall that |J|=M) deﬁned as follows (no summation
overA):
ΩiA≡UiA/radicalbig
/tildewideλ(A) (23)
A∈J (24)
We have
Γ−1=X/tildewideΓ−1XT(25)
and
/tildewideΓ−1=ǫ−1Z−1−ǫ−2Z−1/tildewideΩQ−1/tildewideΩTZ−1(26)
whereQ−1
ABis the inverse of QABdeﬁned as
QAB≡δAB+/tildewideQAB (27)
/tildewideQ≡ǫ−1/tildewideΩTZ−1/tildewideΩ (28)
In the limit ǫ→0 we have:
Γ−1=ǫ−1/bracketleftbig
∆−1−∆−1Ω (ΩT∆−1Ω)−1ΩT∆−1/bracketrightbig
+O(1) (29)
In fact, the eigenvalues /tildewideλAofCdo not even enter. Indeed, let us restrict Usuch
that it is an N×Mmatrix:U≡(UiA). Then we have
Γ−1=ǫ−1Θ+O(1) (30)
where
Θ≡∆−1−∆−1U(UT∆−1U)−1UT∆−1(31)
I.e., in the small ǫ(near-singular) limit, to the leading order the inverse of Γ is
determined solely by the inverse of the regulator matrix ∆ and the eig envectors UiA
ofCcorresponding to its large eigenvalues. Furthermore, in this limit the weights
are given by
wi=/tildewideξN/summationdisplay
j=1Θijαj (32)
where/tildewideξis a normalization constant ﬁxed by the weight normalization condition (2).
So, the weights for S→max in the singular limit are controlled by the choice of the
regulator matrix ∆.
53.3 Diagonal ∆: Weighted Regression
When ∆ is diagonal, S→max in the singular limit reduces to a simple weighted
regression. Indeed, let
∆ij=δijvj (33)
We then have
wi=/tildewideξ
vi/parenleftBigg
αi−N/summationdisplay
j=1αj
vjK/summationdisplay
A,B=1UiAUjB/hatwideQ−1
AB/parenrightBigg
≡/tildewideξ
viεi (34)
where/hatwideQ−1
ABis the inverse of
/hatwideQAB≡N/summationdisplay
i=11
viUiAUiB (35)
Note that
N/summationdisplay
i=1wiUiA≡0 (36)
Infact,εiaretheresiduals ofaweighted regression (withweights 1 /vi) ofαioverUiA
(without an intercept). For non-diagonal ∆ we have a generalized m atrix-weighted
regression.
3.4 A Simple Regularization
A simple regularization is given by:
Γ≡(1−q)D+q C≡qΓ1 (37)
Dij≡δijCjj (38)
Whenq→1, we have ǫ≡(1−q)/q→0. The inversion of Γ 1then produces the
above weighted regression with vi=Cii,i.e., the weights are inverse variances.
4 Factor Model
Looking at (16), one recognizes a multi-factor model – well, of a ver y special form,
that is, as it has vanishing speciﬁc risk. Its deformed version, (17) , with diagonal
∆, however, has non-zero speciﬁc risk. The factor loadings matrix is simply the
N×MmatrixUiA, and the factor covariance matrix is a diagonal M×Mmatrix
/tildewideΛAB=δAB/tildewideλ(B),A,B∈J(see Subsection 3.2 for deﬁnitions). The Mrisk factors
comprising the columns of the factor loadings matrix UiAare nothing but the ﬁrst
Mprincipal components of the covariance matrix Cij. This is essentially all in the
spirit of the APT risk model.
6Here we can ask if we can construct more general multi-factor risk models for
alpha streams. There are two main reasons for doing so. The oﬀ-dia gonal elements
ofCijare not expected to be particularly stable out-of-sample. This inst ability is in-
herited by theprincipal components and the factor loadingsmatrix U. Furthermore,
here we have at most Mrisk factors, which typically is small because the number of
observations is limited for alpha streams – including due to their ephem eral nature.
So, we wish to increase the number of risk factors and improve their out-of-sample
stability. How can we achieve this?
The key observation here is that, whatever we use as the risk fact ors, we cannot
use the alpha correlations or correlations ofother quantities with a lphasto construct
the factor loading matrix or compute the factor covariance matrix – if we do this, we
will not get much beyond the Mfactors based on the principal components because
the number of observations for alphas is limited to M+ 1. So, we need to build
risk factors that are not based on correlations with alphas and for which we can
compute the factor covariance matrix based on a number of obser vations, call it
MF, such that MF≫M, or use risk factors for which the factor covariance matrix
is readily available one way or another. Before we discuss some ways o f approaching
this problem, let us set up our notations ﬁrst.
4.1 Generalities
Just as in the case of a stock multi-factor risk model, instead of Nalphas, one deals
withF≪Nrisk factors and the covariance matrix Cijis replaced by Γ ijgiven by
Γ≡Ξ+Ω Φ ΩT(39)
Ξij≡ξ2
iδij (40)
whereξiis the speciﬁc risk for each αi; ΩiAis anN×Ffactor loadings matrix; and
ΦABis the factor covariance matrix, A,B= 1,...,F.I.e., the random processes Υ i
corresponding to Nalphas are modeled via Nrandom processes zi(corresponding
to speciﬁc risk) together with Frandom processes fA(corresponding to factor risk):
Υi=zi+F/summationdisplay
A=1ΩiAfA (41)
/an}bracketle{tzi,zj/an}bracketri}ht= Ξij (42)
/an}bracketle{tzi,fA/an}bracketri}ht= 0 (43)
/an}bracketle{tfA,fB/an}bracketri}ht= ΦAB (44)
/an}bracketle{tΥi,Υj/an}bracketri}ht= Γij (45)
Instead of an N×Nalpha covariance matrix Cijwe now have an F×Ffactor co-
variance matrix Φ AB, which is expected to be more stable out-of-sample. Assuming
allξi>0 and Φ ABis positive-deﬁnite, then Γ ijis also positive deﬁnite.13
13Strictly speaking, positive-deﬁniteness of Γ ijdoes not require, e.g., positive-deﬁniteness of
ΦAB, but consideringthe practicalnature ofour discussionhere, we w ill not try to be most general.
74.2 Risk Factors
We have already discussed the principal component approach abov e. The question
we wish to address is what other risk factors we can build for alphas. The analogy
with the stock multi-factor models is a good starting point.
One approach to constructing a factor model for alphas is to have Fstylestyle risk
factors and Fclustercluster risk factors. In the case of stocks, cluster risk factors are
usually referred to as industry risk factors. Since here we are dea ling with alphas,
we will refer to such risk factors as cluster risk factors. In the ca se of alphas, the
following style factors a prioriappear to be appropriate: 1) volatility, 2) turnover,14
and 3) momentum. One may wish to add other style factors dependin g on how
alphas are constructed, etc. One other (perhaps more diﬃcult to implement) style
factor one may wish to consider is capacity,15i.e., how much capital each alpha can
absorb on its own; this requires modeling impact ( i.e., nonlinear trading costs). We
comment on capacity in Appendix A.
Inthecase ofstocks, cluster factorsare(usually) based onindu stry classiﬁcation.
In the case of alphas, one can use a taxonomy of alphas, i.e., one classiﬁes alphas
according to how they are constructed – if the required data is ava ilable, that is.
Out of thousands of alphas one may construct, many are very simila r to each other
by construction. It is then clear that this similarity makes them more correlated,
just as stocks belonging to the same industry are more correlated . Just as in the
case of stocks, it therefore makes sense to treat clusters as ris k factors and model
correlationsbetweenalphasbasedonsuchriskfactorsasoppose dtocomputing them
directly based on a large number Nof the time series corresponding to individual
alphas. One diﬃculty with the alpha classiﬁcation approach, however , is that the
details of how each alpha is constructed must be known to those who build the
factor model for alphas, and that is not always the case. Further more, in the case
of stocks, the industry classiﬁcation generally is a very stable cons truct – companies
do not tend to jump industries often.16Alphas, however, are ephemeral by nature.
So, the style risk factors we described above are more-or-less ea sy to implement,
but the alpha classiﬁcation not so much. Unfortunately, the numbe r of style risk
factorsisnotlargeenoughtomakesubstantial diﬀerence compar edwithMprincipal
14TurnoverroughlycanbethoughtofasbeinganalogoustoADDV(av eragedailydollarvolume,
which can be viewed as a measure of liquidity) to market capitalization r atio in the case of stocks.
Becauseturnovertypicallyishighlycorrelatedwithalpha’sholdinghor izon(the shortertheholding
horizon, the higher the turnover), including the turnover style ris k factor in an alpha factor model
aﬀects the weightingofdiﬀerent holdinghorizonalphaswhen using su ch factormodel in regressions
and/oroptimization (and this itself depends on how the turnoverris kfactor is deﬁned). We discuss
the eﬀect of diﬀerent holding horizons in more detail in Section 5.
15Capacity roughly can be thought of as being analogous to market ca pitalization (or size) in
the case of stocks.
16Here we do not consider ticker de-listings, M&As, ticker changes or new ticker additions as
an “instability”. An instability in an industry classiﬁcation would mean th at it was based on some
underlying aspects of companies that would make tickers change ind ustries frequently. That would
be a poorly constructed industry classiﬁcation.
8component riskfactors, because Mcanbesubstantial ( e.g., ifthetimeseriesisbased
on daily alphas with a 1-year look-back). One straightforward way t o increase the
number of style factors is to break up each style factor into quant iles. If the number
of quantiles kis uniform over Fstylestyle risk factors, then this way we increase
the number of such risk factors to Fk
style, which can be substantial. However, the
eﬀective number of the resulting style risk factors, while quite possibly larger than
Fstyle, may not be as large as Fk
stylebecause of high correlations between various
quantiles. Nonetheless, the quantile method is a simple way of squeez ing more juice
out of style risk factors.
Anotherthoughtistousethewell-establishedriskfactorsforsto cksasriskfactors
foralphas, atleastforthosealphaswhoseunderlyingtradablesar estocks.17Ifalphas
themselves have no intrinsic risk management, then this is a sound ap proach – in
fact, one may very well wish to do risk management in this way. Howev er, normally
alphasareexpected tobehedgedagainstmost riskfactors, soint hiscaseriskfactors
for stocks are already (essentially) “factored” out of alphas.18
4.3 Underlying Tradables as Risk Factors
However, even if risk factors for stocks are factored out, spec iﬁc risks for stocks are
not. So, the idea is to use the underlying tradables – the stocks the mselves – as risk
factors.19One needs to quantify this, i.e., we need to construct the factor loadings
matrix and the factor covariance matrix. Here is one way of doing th is.
For concreteness, let the underlying tradables be U.S. equities (th is is not a
critical assumption), so Alabels stocks in the universe traded by the combined
alphas. In the 0th approximation the covariance matrix is diagonal: Φ AB=vAδAB,
wherevAare the historical variances for stock returns RA. To compute vAeven
if, say,F= 2,500, there is no need to go back 10 years, because variances are
substantially more stable than covariances. So, the look-back for computing vA
can be much shorter, e.g., monthly or annual. Beyond the 0th approximation Φ AB
is not diagonal. The oﬀ-diagonal elements themselves need to be mod eled via a
factor model approach for stocks; however, as we discussed ab ove, these are readily
available (see footnote 17). No alpha correlations or correlations w ith alphas are
needed to obtain Φ AB.
17Here one can use one’s multi-factor risk model of choice, such as BA RRA, Northﬁeld, Ax-
ioma, Quantigic, SunGard APT, etc.One can also use industry classiﬁcations, i.e., use industries
(or equivalent groupings, sometimes referred to as sub-industrie s) as risk factors, e.g., based on
Bloomberg, GICS, ICB, etc.
18In case they are not, one can get a relatively large number of such r isk factors for which the
factor covariance matrix is either readily available if one uses a multi-f actor risk model for stocks,
or easily computable based on multi-year look-backs for daily stock r eturns. We will comment on
how to build the corresponding factor loadings matrices below. Also, some alphas intentionally
may have risk exposure, and care is needed not to suppress such a lphas inadvertently.
19The underlying tradables need not be stocks. They can be any instr uments. The idea applies
all the same. Also, this idea has much broader applicability beyond alph a streams (see below).
9The next step is to identify Ω iA. As we mentioned above, the information about
how individual alphas are constructed may not be available to us. How ever, the
position data for each alpha had better be available to us if we are to t rade them.
Let this position data be PiAs, which is the dollar holding of the alpha labeled by i
in the stock labeled by Aat time labeled by ts, normalized so that/summationtext
A|PiAs|= 1
for each given pair i,s. We need to construct Ω iAfromPiAs– assuming there is
no other data available to us, that is. I.e., we need to get rid of the time series
indexs. The obvious choice20ΩiA≡/summationtext
sPiAsdoes not work as the sign of PiAs
ﬂips over time frequently (assuming alphas have short holding period s). Basically,
ΩiA≡/summationtext
sPiAsis essentially as unstable as Cor( αi,RA), which cannot produce more
thanMindependent risk factors. It is clear that we need an unsigned quantity to
deﬁne Ω iA. We can use
ΩiA≡/summationdisplay
s|PiAs| (46)
This is no longer unstable or similar to Cor( αi,RA). However, there is a regime
where this deﬁnition may not work or may produce the eﬀective numb er of risk
factorsF1lower21(or even substantially lower) than F. If most alphas are trading
most stocks at their trading bounds most of the time, and if these b ounds are
essentially uniform, then it is clear that in this case most Ω iAdeﬁned this way will
be close to each other – the extreme case being Ω iA≡γ, whereγis independent of
iandA, in which case we would have only a single risk factor proportional to a unit
vector (a.k.a. intercept). The in-between case is where the eﬀect ive number of risk
factors based on (46) is 1 < F1< F. IfF1≪F, then most bounds are saturated, so
we can still keep the F1risk factors based on (46)22and add more risk factors based
on a quadratic invariant. We cannot use any covariances w.r.t. s, so we can choose:
ΩiA≡/radicalbig
Var(PiAs) (47)
where Var is the variance w.r.t. sfor each given pair i,A. There is an alternative
deﬁnition
ΩiA≡/radicalbig
Var(|PiAs|) (48)
which, however, is not expected to make a huge diﬀerence. Furthe rmore, one can
use MAD instead of√
Var, but these are minor details, which are not going to make
it or break it. So, with (46), (47) and/or (48), one should be able to capture the
Frisk factors, or a substantial number of them much greater than M. And this
can be done for alphas with overnight holdings and purely intraday alp has (as well
as alphas that receive substantial contributions both from overn ight holdings and
20The sum over scan be,e.g., monthly or annual for alphas with overnight holdings and shorter
for intraday alphas (see below).
21F1is the number of nonzero (or, in practice, “non-small”) eigenvalues of the matrix Ω Φ ΩT.
22In practice, when mixing non-uniformly deﬁned risk factors, one mu st deal with the issue of
how to deﬁne the factor covariancematrix for such mixed factors , including relative normalizations
between non-uniformly deﬁned risk factors. In this regard, some times it is simpler to have a
uniformly deﬁned set of risk factors.
10intraday realized P&L). When dealing with intraday (components of) alphas, the
variances in (47) and (48) are understood as appropriately deﬁne d intraday.
We have been cavalier with the normalization of Ω iAas deﬁned in (46), (47)
and/or (48). This is because once Ω iAare identiﬁed, they need to be properly
normalized anyway in order to construct the speciﬁc risks, which will complete the
risk model. This is a nontrivial step, which we will not delve into here.23
The risk factors in (46), (47) and (48) are deﬁned this way becaus e the premise is
that, whatever theriskfactorsonedeﬁnes, thefactorcovaria ncematrixΦ ABiseither
readily available or computable without using the alpha correlations or correlations
with alphas24. Basically, assuming the only information available is the position
dataPiAs, there is not much of a choice in deﬁning Ω iA.
Also, let us emphasize that the idea of using underlying tradables as r isk factors
applies beyond alphas. If we have any Nprocesses Xis,i= 1,...,Ndetermined by
Fprocesses YAs,A= 1,...,FviaXis=/summationtextF
A=1PiAsYAs, wherePiAsare previsible,
then we can use YAsas risk factors for Xisso long as the PiAsdata is available to
us. And this need not even be in the context of trading or ﬁnance.25
Let us summarize by giving an outline for constructing risk factors f or alphas.
To simplify things, let us not mix diﬀerent deﬁnitions of the factor load ings matrix.
Let us focus on the deﬁnition (47) uniformly across all alphas. This g ives the factor
loadings up to an overall normalization factor . The factor covariance matrix Φ AB
thenisjustthecovariancematrixforstockslabeledby A= 1,...,F. Thiscovariance
matrix Φ ABcan itself be modeled as a factor model (see footnote 17). In a simp ler
approximation one could use a diagonal Φ AB=vAδAB, wherevAare stock return
variances. Also, if the risk management is done at the level of individu al alphas,
then one may wish to remove from the deﬁnition of the alpha risk fact ors the linear
combinations of stocks corresponding to the stock risk factors. I.e., in this case the
factor loadings matrix Ω iAis replaced by another factor loadings matrix Ω′
iA′, where
A′= 1,...,F′, andF′=F−FS, whereFSis the number of stock risk factors. On
the other hand, if the risk management is not done at the level of ind ividual alphas,
then, as mentioned above, one can use the stock risk factors the mselves as the alpha
risk factors. Let Λ Aabe the factor loadings matrix for the stock risk factors, where
a= 1,...,F S. Then we can deﬁne Pias≡/summationtextF
A=1PiAsΛAa, and use this Piasas above
to deﬁne the corresponding FSalpha risk factors Ω ia(up to a normalization factor).
Finally, let usnotethat wecancombine theaforementionedalpha fac torloadings
matrices Ω iAor Ωia(or Ω′
iA′plus Ω ia) with alpha style risk factors as well as the
principal component risk factors, etc., if desired. One then needs to deal with the
aforementioned issue of proper relative normalization of non-unifo rmly deﬁned risk
factors. Another issue is that such non-uniformly deﬁned risk fac tors generally have
23In fact, this step is the key ingredient to building a successful fact or model and is treated as
proprietary knowhow by factor model providers, including Quantig ic.
24Using alpha variances is ﬁne as they are much more stable than covar iances and, unlike
covariances, do not limit the number of risk factors to M.
25E.g., health risk factors, etc.
11nonzero correlations. Even if the factor covariance matrix for ea ch set is known,
the factor covariance matrix across the sets is not necessarily kn own. Here one can
take a factor model approach and treat each set as a “superclus ter” and compute
the factor covariance matrix between the “superclusters” using the alpha covariance
matrix. Thus, let us assume that we have two (properly normalized) sets of risk
factors Ω(1)
iA1and Ω(2)
iA2with the (properly normalized) factor covariance matrices
Φ(1)
A1B1and Φ(2)
A2B2, respectively, with A1,B1= 1,...,F 1, andA2,B2= 1,...,F 2. Let
f(1)≡N/summationdisplay
i=1F1/summationdisplay
A1=1αiν(1)
A1Ω(1)
iA1(49)
f(2)≡N/summationdisplay
i=1F2/summationdisplay
A2=1αiν(2)
A2Ω(2)
iA2(50)
whereν(1)andν(2)are some weights – we can choose, e.g., equal weighting. Then
the covariance between f(1)andf(2)is given by
/angbracketleftbig
f(1),f(2)/angbracketrightbig
=N/summationdisplay
i,j=1F1/summationdisplay
A1=1F2/summationdisplay
A2=1CijΩ(1)
iA1Ω(1)
iA2ν(1)
A1ν(2)
A2(51)
whereCijis the sample alpha covariance matrix computed using the actual alph a
time series. Since here we have a single (or a few, in case we have a few more risk
factor sets) covariance and M≫1, this covariance can be acceptably stable. Then,
up to an overall normalization factor , insteadofthe0thapproximationΦ A1A2= 0, in
theﬁrstapproximationwecansetΦ A1A2≈/angbracketleftbig
f(1),f(2)/angbracketrightbig
. Notethatthismethodcanbe
usedinthecaseofquantiledstylefactorswediscussed aboveaslon gasthenumber of
such quantiled style factors Fk
styleis not larger (and preferably – for stability reasons
– is much smaller) than M. In this case instead of two sets as above we have Fk
style
sets.26To reiterate, in the above discussion the (relative) normalizations o f the
factor loadings matrices corresponding to non-uniformly deﬁned f actor loadings can
be tricky, and they are ﬁxed when the speciﬁc risks are computed.27
5 Concluding Remarks
Our primary motivation for considering factor models for alphas str eams is twofold
(see Section 4). First, the oﬀ-diagonal elements of the sample cov ariance matrix
Cijare not expected to be particularly stable out-of-sample. Second , whenM < N
(recall that M+1 is the number of observations in the alpha time series based on
whichCijis computed), which typically is the case in practice including due to the
26And this method also applies to the style risk factors themselves, wh enk= 1.
27Computation ofthe speciﬁc risks, which, as mentioned above, is a pr oprietarytopic, is outside
of the scope of this paper.
12ephemeral nature of alphas, then Cijis singular with only Mnonzero eigenvalues.
In fact, in most practical applications M≪N.
In this regard, using alpha factor models – at least, for the purpos es of alpha
weight allocation(via regression or optimization) – is warranted when the number of
alphasNis large. Indeed, we must have F≪N(recall that Fis the number of risk
factors). If one is dealing with, say, a dozen or so alphas, then for any reasonable
historical track record (that one would feel comfortable with to t rade these alphas
moving forward), the sample covariance matrix is non-singular. Fur thermore, in
such a case replacing the sample covariance matrix with a factor mod el covariance
matrix based on, say, half a dozen risk factors would appear to be a n overkill. If, for
some reason, it is imperative to have F < Nrisk factors, in the case of such small
None can simply take the ﬁrst Fprincipal components of the sample covariance
matrix as such factors. Anything else would appear to be overly con trived.28
Furthermore, a large number of almost 100% correlated alphas wou ld imply
that the true number of independent alphas is much lower. While it is re latively
straightforward to construct a large number of highly correlated alphas (e.g., one
can take simple mean-reversion and/or momentum alphas and tweak parameters),
it is much harder to construct a large number of alphas with low corre lations. It
takes a large number of quant researchers and developers and su bstantial hardware
capabilities (for data mining purposes) to construct a large number of not-too-
correlated alphas. All such eﬀorts are highly proprietary, so it is no t practicable to
cite applications or tests of our framework and methods to/on rea l-life alphas.29
The purpose ofthis paper is toset upa general framework for con structing factor
models for alpha streams with the view of elucidating it as a viable possib ility. It
appears that many practitioners might not have even considered f actor models for
alphas streams, likely due to the fact that usually practitioners view more familiar
factor models for equities such as BARRA, Northﬁeld, Axioma, etc., as something
one acquires from a provider, not something one builds in-house. Ho wever, both
equities and alpha factor models can be built in-house. In fact, in the case of factor
models foralphas thereis no other choice but tobuild them in-house, asthe required
informationrelatingtothealphasishighlyproprietaryandoftenrat herspeciﬁcfrom
shop-to-shop in what details of alphas are available.30As “standardized” alpha
factor models appear unlikely, custom alpha factor models are the w ay to go.
In footnote 14 we mentioned the eﬀect of the turnover risk facto r on alphas
with diﬀerent holding horizons. For literature on combining signals with diﬀerent
half-lives, see [89, 90, 96]. In the case of alphas, the holding horizon s are related to
turnover: the shorter the holding horizon, thehigher the turnov er. However, there is
28In this regard, there is a similarity with equities: if one is trading a coup le of dozen stocks,
equity factormodels are not useful (at least, not in their applicatio nsthat we focus on here). When
one is trading, say, 1,000-2,500 stocks, then using factor models f or equities is warranted.
29And not because this has not been done.
30E.g., as mentioned in Section 4.2, in some cases information may be available to create alpha
taxonomy, in others only the position data may be available, which is ins uﬃcient for taxonomy.
13anotherpracticalconsideration. Typically, lowturnover strateg ieshavelowerSharpe
ratio and lower return on capital and higher capacity than higher tu rnover strate-
gies. Higher Sharpe ratio/return strategies often enjoy higher p erformance fees,
while their lower turnover counterparts can have substantially lowe r performance
fees, but high capacity yields large dollar amounts in management fee s. Because of
these considerations, in practical applications mixing strategies wit h vastly diﬀer-
ent turnovers usually is not simply a question of weight allocation. On t he other
hand, weighting alphas with varying but in the same ballpark turnover s can be
handled through appropriately deﬁning the turnover style risk fac tor.31However,
one must also incorporate trading costs into optimization (or regre ssion), which re-
quires accounting for turnover reduction – when alphas are combin ed, some trades
are crossed, and the resultant portfolio turnover is reduced. Tu rnover reduction
signiﬁcantly diﬀerentiates alpha portfolio optimization problem from s tock portfolio
optimization problem, but the former is still tractable.32In this regard, holding
horizons aﬀect alpha weights, among other ways, via trading costs .
A Capacity
In Subsection 4.2 we mentioned capacity as a possible risk factor. He re we discuss
capacity brieﬂy. If there are no costs or only linear costs are pres ent, portfolio
capacityisunlimited. Onceweintroducenonlinearcosts(impact), po rtfoliocapacity
has a ﬁnite bound. Capacity is simply the value of the investment level I=I∗at
which the P&L (computed for optimized alpha weights) is maximized. Le tα≡/summationtextN
i=1αiwifor the optimized weights. The P&L is given by
P=α I−L D−1
nQ Dn=T/parenleftbigg
/tildewiderM I−1
nQ Tn−1In/parenrightbigg
(52)
whereD=I Tis the dollar amount traded, Lis the linear cost per dollar traded,
Tis the turnover, the impact coeﬃcient Qand power n >1 are model-dependent
(and can be measured empirically), and
/tildewiderM≡α
T−L (53)
is the eﬀective “proﬁt margin”, which includes linear costs (but not im pact).
The P&L is maximized at
I∗=1
T/parenleftBigg/tildewiderM
Q/parenrightBigg1
n−1
(54)
31E.g., one can deﬁne it via a log of turnover, further conformed to a nor mal distribution.
Alternatively, one can, say, choose to suppress high turnover st rategies (to mitigate trading costs)
even more and deﬁne the turnover risk factor without taking a log.
32See [105, 106], which utilize the spectral model of turnover reduct ion of [102].
14Note that the capacity I∗increases as the turnover Tdecreases. At the capacity
bound we have the following P&L
P∗=M∗T I∗=n−1
n/parenleftBigg/tildewiderMn
Q/parenrightBigg1
n−1
(55)
M∗≡n−1
n/tildewiderM (56)
HereM∗is the “proﬁt margin” at capacity. Note that for n= 1.5, which is often
assumed, we have M∗=/tildewiderM/3,I∗=/tildewiderM2/TQ2andP∗=/tildewiderM3/3Q2. Note that/tildewiderM
depends on the turnover T.
When we combine a large number Nof alphas, we can use the spectral model of
[102] to model turnover reduction due to the crossing of trades, according to which
in the leading order in the 1 /Nexpansion the portfolio turnover is given by
T≈ρ∗N/summationdisplay
i=1Ti|wi| ≡ρ∗τ (57)
whereTiare individual alpha turnovers, and 0 < ρ∗≤1 is the turnover reduction
coeﬃcient, which can be computed using Eq. (34) of [102]. With the s ame caveats
as in the case of the turnover, one can repeat the arguments of [1 02] for the impact
coeﬃcient Qand argue that in the large Nlimit we also have Q≈ρ∗κ, where
κ≡/summationtextN
i=1Qi|wi|, andQiare the impact coeﬃcients for individual alphas. Then the
ρ∗dependence of the capacity bound is given by
I∗≈1
τ ρn
n−1∗/parenleftBigg/tildewiderM
κ/parenrightBigg1
n−1
(58)
Forn= 1.5 we have I∗∼1/ρ3
∗. Recalling from [102] that ρ∗isroughlyan average
correlationbetween thealphas, (58)gives thepower-law forthec apacity dependence
on the average correlation of alphas in a portfolio.
In general nneeds to be measured empirically. Measuring it directly for a port-
folio is diﬃcult. Below we give a simple method for measuring nforindividual
stocks. We can then approximate nfor a portfolio as a weighted (these weights can
be uniform) average of the impact powers nAfor individual stocks.
A.1 Measuring Impact
Thefollowingdiscussion, unlessotherwisestated, appliestoanindivid ual stock. The
notations in this subsection are self-contained and should not be co nfused with the
notations in the rest of the paper. M, with an appropriate index, denotes midquote.
P, with an appropriate index, denotes last print. Let us partition a tr ading day into
15Nequal intervals Iispanning time between Ti−1andTi,i= 1,...,N, whereT0=
9:30 AM, and TN= 4:00 PM.33
For each interval Ii, letPia(a= 1,...,K i) be all prints at times Tia, where
Ti−1≤Tia< Ti. LetViabe the corresponding volumes traded. Let AiaandBiabe
the ask and bid prices at the times Tia. For the sake of simplicity, we will exclude
all times TiawithAia≤Bia. That is, in the following, unless otherwise stated,
summation over a= 1,...,K iis understood to exclude datapoints with crossed and
locked markets ( Aia≤Bia).
Next, let
Wia≡F/parenleftbigg
2Pia−Bia
Aia−Bia/parenrightbigg
(59)
whereF(x)≡sign(x) min(|x|,1).Wiaact as weights. For Pia=Aiawe have
Wia= 1, forPia=Biawe haveWia=−1, and the weight is 0 if the print is at the
midquote. The following method can also be implemented with simpliﬁed we ights
where one uses sign( Wia) instead of Wia.34
Now we deﬁne
Vi≡Ki/summationdisplay
a=1WiaVia (60)
Ui≡Mi−Mi−1 (61)
HereUiis the change in the stock price (or, more precisely, in its midquote) d uring
the interval Ii. We use midquotes at the endpoints of the interval as opposed to t he
prints because the prints have extra noise in them, e.g., due to the fact that prints
can occur at diﬀerent pricepoints within the same bid-ask spread.
The impact model discussed earlier in this appendix assumes that the nonlin-
ear cost of trading scales with the traded volume Vas|V|n. HereV >0 for
shares bought and V <0 for shares sold. The impact on the price then scales as
nsign(V)|V|n−1, which is the ﬁrst derivative of |V|nw.r.t.V. Our goal is to
measure the power n.
This can be achieved by modeling impact using the datapoints ( Vi,Ui) deﬁned
above. First, we exclude all such datapoints with sign( Ui)/ne}ationslash= sign(Vi). Then in R
notations n−1 can be determined as the coeﬃcient of ln |V|in the linear model
(with an intercept)
ln|Ui| ∼ln|Vi| (62)
The datapoints used in the linear model can span diﬀerent trading da ys.
33One can choose these intervals to mimic real-life executions, e.g., how VWAP is executed. In
particular, they need not be uniform.
34In general, one can utilize variations of the method described here. One can also look at bid
and ask sizes and the (properly weighted) order book depth and ad d other bells and whistles,
including Aia≤Biacases,etc.
16A.1.1 Executions
The above method is based on intraday pricing and volume data and allo ws to
estimate the expected value of non average, without taking into account the actual
executions in a given strategy. Better or worse executions could le ad to a diﬀerent
realized value of n, which we will denote as ν. The challenge with determining νis
that it is diﬃcult to determine the price change analogous to Uiabove attributable
solely to executions in a given strategy because this strategy is only one of many
market participants aﬀecting the price. Instead, what can be det ermined is the cost
Cof trading Ddollars. Again, as above, one can break up the trading day into
intervals Iiand calculate the actual cost of trading Didollars by comparing the ﬁll
pricesFia(a= 1,...,K i) for the corresponding numbers of shares Viaduring the
intervalIiwith the midquote Mi−1at the beginning of such interval. Then we have
Ci=Ki/summationdisplay
a=1Via(Fia−Mi−1) (63)
Di=Mi−1/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleKi/summationdisplay
a=1Via/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle(64)
Here one can use a benchmark other than Mi−1, as applicable. Also, summation
overa= 1,...,K iis not restricted here.
The cost Cis modeled as
C=L D+1
νQ Dν(65)
However, here we have three unknowns, linear slippage35L, the impact coeﬃcient
Qand the power ν. To circumvent this, one can scan values of ν(around the value
ofn, if the latter has been measured as outlined above) and ﬁt the coeﬃ cientsL
andQvia a linear model. Thus, let /tildewideQ≡Q/ν. Then in R notations Land/tildewideQare
the coeﬃcients of the linear model (without an intercept)
C∼ −1+D+I(Dν) (66)
Onecanthenpickthevalueof νcorresponding tothebestﬁt. Finally, letusmention
that the values of nandνmeasured as outlined above will vary from stock to stock.
For portfolios one can use a median or weighted average value.
B Factor Covariance Matrix and Speciﬁc Risk
In this appendix we discuss a simple method for obtaining the factor c ovariance
matrix for a set of risk factors based on the sample covariance mat rix computed
35For our purposes here, Lincludes only linear slippage and excludes ﬁxed trading costs (such
as SEC fees, exchange fees, broker-dealer fees, etc.).
17based on alpha time series. This approach is useful when the factor covariance
matrix for a set of risk factors is not readily available or computable. An example
of this kind of a situation is the case of style risk factors (or their qu antiled versions
discussed in Subsection 4.2. Another example is the case of alpha clus ters based on
alpha taxonomy – if one can be built, that is.
In the factor model approach we have (41)-(45) and (40). Let
QAB≡N/summationdisplay
i=1ΩiAΩiB (67)
/tildewideQAB≡Q−1
AB (68)
We have
ΦAB=F/summationdisplay
C,D=1/tildewideQAC/tildewideQBD/parenleftBiggN/summationdisplay
i,j=1ΩiCΩjDΓij−N/summationdisplay
i=1ξ2
iΩiCΩiD/parenrightBigg
(69)
On the other hand, we have
ξ2
i= Γii−F/summationdisplay
A,B=1ΦABΩiAΩiB (70)
Plugging (70) into (69) we get a matrix equations for Φ AB:
ΦAB−F/summationdisplay
C,D,C′,D′=1/tildewideQAC/tildewideQBDTCDC′D′ΦC′D′=F/summationdisplay
C,D=1/tildewideQAC/tildewideQBDN/summationdisplay
i,j=1, i/negationslash=jΩiCΩjDΓij
(71)
where
TABCD≡N/summationdisplay
i=1ΩiAΩiBΩiCΩiD (72)
is a totally symmetric 4-tensor. So, the idea is that, in cases where Φ ABis not
independently computable, one can ﬁx it via (71) by replacing Γ ijvia the sample
covariance matrix Cij.
B.1 Binary Factor Loadings
The above discussion simpliﬁes substantially if the factor loadings Ω iAare binary,
i.e., they take only two values, 0 or 1, and indicate if the alpha labeled by ibelongs
to the alpha cluster labeled by F:
ΩiA=δG(i),A (73)
G:{1,...,N} /ma√sto→ {1,...,F} (74)
18whereGis the map between alphas and the alpha clusters. Also,
NA≡N/summationdisplay
i=1δG(i),A (75)
is the number of alphas that belong to the cluster labeled by A. Note that
F/summationdisplay
A=1NA=N (76)
We have:
QAB=NAδAB (77)
/tildewideQAB=1
NAδAB (78)
TAAAA=NA(other components vanish) (79)
ΦAB=1
NANB/summationdisplay
i:G(i)=A/summationdisplay
j:G(j)=BCij, A/ne}ationslash=B (80)
ΦAA=1
NA(NA−1)/summationdisplay
i,j:G(i)=A, G(j)=A, i/negationslash=jCij (81)
ξ2
i=Cii−ΦG(i),G(i) (82)
Here one can immediately see the issue we mentioned in Section 4: ξ2
iare not
guaranteed to be positive.36
References
[1] T. Schneeweis, R. Spurgin, and D. McCarthy, “Survivor Bias in Co mmodity
Trading Advisor Performance”, J. Futures Markets, 1996, 16(7 ), 757-772.
[2] C. Ackerman, R. McEnally and D. Revenscraft, “The Performan ce of Hedge
Funds: Risk, Return and Incentives”, Journal of Finance, 1999, 54(3), 833-874.
[3] S.J. Brown, W. Goetzmann and R.G. Ibbotson, “Oﬀshore Hedge F unds: Sur-
vival and Performance, 1989-1995”, Journal of Business, 1999 , 72(1), 91-117.
[4] F.R. Edwards and J. Liew, “Managed Commodity Funds”, Journal of Futures
Markets, 1999, 19(4), 377-411.
[5] F.R. Edwards and J. Liew, “Hedge Funds versus Managed Future s as Asset
Classes”, Journal of Derivatives, 1999, 6(4), 45-64.
36As we mentioned in Section 4, the resolution of this issue is a proprieta ry topic, which is
outside of the scope of this paper.
19[6] W. Fung and D. Hsieh, “A Primer on Hedge Funds”, Journal of Emp irical
Finance, 1999, 6(3), 309-331.
[7] B. Liang, “On the Performance of Hedge Funds”, Financial Analy sts Journal,
1999, 55(4), 72-85.
[8] V. Agarwal and N.Y. Naik, “On Taking the “Alternative” Route: Th e Risks,
Rewards, and Performance Persistence of Hedge Funds”, Journ al of Alternative
Investments, 2000, 2(4), 6-23.
[9] V. Agarwal and N.Y. Naik, “Multi-Period Performance Persistenc e Analysis of
Hedge Funds Source”, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analy sis, 2000,
35(3), 327-342.
[10] W. Fungand D.Hsieh, “Performance Characteristics of Hedge FundsandCom-
modity Funds: Natural vs. Spurious Biases”, Journal of Financial and Quanti-
tative Analysis, 2000, 35(3), 291-307.
[11] B. Liang, “Hedge Funds: The Living and the Dead”, Journal of F inancial and
Quantitative Analysis, 2000, 35(3), 309-326.
[12] C.S. Asness, R.J. Krail, and J.M. Liew, “Do Hedge Funds Hedge?”, Journal of
Portfolio Management, 2001, 28(1), 6-19.
[13] F.R. Edwards and M.O. Caglayan, “Hedge Fund and Commodity Fun d In-
vestments in Bull and Bear Markets”, Journal of Portfolio Manage ment, 2001,
27(4), 97-108.
[14] W. Fung and D. Hsieh, “The Risk in Hedge Fund Strategies: Theor y and
Evidence from Trend Followers”, Review of Financial Studies, 2001, 14(2), 313-
341.
[15] B. Liang, “Hedge Fund Performance: 1990-1999”, Financial A nalysts Journal,
2001, 57(1), 11-18.
[16] A.W. Lo, “Risk Management For Hedge Funds: Introduction and Overview”,
Financial Analysis Journal, 2001, 57(6), 16-33.
[17] C. Brooks and H.M. Kat, “The Statistical Properties of Hedge F und Index Re-
turnsandTheir Implications forInvestors”, JournalofAlternat iveInvestments,
2002, 5(2), 26-44.
[18] D.-L. Kao, “Battle for Alphas: Hedge Funds versus Long-Only P ortfolios”,
Financial Analysts Journal, 2002, 58(2), 16-36.
[19] G. Amin and H. Kat, “Stocks, Bonds and Hedge Funds: Not a Fre e Lunch!”,
Journal of Portfolio Management, 2003, 29(4), 113-120.
20[20] N. Chan, M. Getmansky, S.M. Haas and A.W. Lo, “Systemic Risk an d Hedge
Funds”, published in: Carey, M. and Stulz, R.M., eds., “The Risks of Fin ancial
Institutions” (University of Chicago Press, 2006), Chapter 6, 23 5-338.
[21] W. Sharpe, “Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibriu m under condi-
tions of risk”, Journal of Finance, 1964, 19(3), 425-442.
[22] J. Lintner, “The valuation of risky assets and the selection of r isky investments
in stock portfolios and capital budgets”, Review of Economics and S tatistics,
1965, 47(1), 13-37.
[23] S. Black, “Capital market equilibrium with restricted borrowing” , Journal of
Business, 1972, 45(3), 444-455.
[24] O. Blume and L. Friend, “A new look at the capital asset pricing mo del”,
Journal of Finance, 1973, 28(1), 19-33.
[25] E. Fama and J. MacBeth, “Risk, return, and equilibrium: Empirica l tests”,
Journal of Political Economy, 1973, 81(3), 607-636.
[26] R. Merton, “An intertemporal capital asset pricing model”, Ec onometrica,
1973, 41(5), 867-887.
[27] S. Ross, “The arbitrage theory of capital asset pricing”, Jou rnal of Economic
Theory, 1976, 13(3), 341-360.
[28] S. Basu, “The investment performance of common stocks in re lation to their
price to earnings ratios: A test of the eﬃcient market hypothesis” , Journal of
Finance, 1977, 32(3), 663-682.
[29] R. Banz, “The relationship between return and market value of common
stocks”, Journal of Financial Economics, 1981, 9(1), 3-18.
[30] W. DeBondt and R. Thaler, “Does the stock market overreact ?”, Journal of
Finance, 1985, 40(3), 739-805.
[31] N. Chen, R. Roll and S. Ross, “Economic forces and the stock m arket”, Journal
of Business, 1986, 59(3), 383-403.
[32] J. Campbell, “Stock returns and the term structure”, Journ al of Financial
Economics, 1987, 18(2), 373-399.
[33] J.CampbellandR.Shiller, “Thedividend-price ratioandexpecta tionsoffuture
dividends and discount factors”, Review of Financial Studies, 1988 , 1(3), 195-
227.
21[34] G. Connor and R. Korajczyk, “Risk and return in an equilibrium AP T: Ap-
plication of a new test methodology”, Journal of Financial Economic s, 1988,
21(2), 255-289.
[35] B.LehmannandD.Modest, “Theempiricalfoundationsofthea rbitragepricing
theory”, Journal of Financial Economics, 1988, 21(2), 213-254 .
[36] A. Lo and A.C. MacKinlay, “Data-snooping biases in tests of ﬁnan cial asset
pricing models”, Review of Financial Studies, 1990, 3(3), 431-468.
[37] G. Schwert, “Stock returns and real activity: A century of e vidence”, Journal
of Finance, 1990, 45(4), 1237-1257.
[38] W. Ferson and C. Harvey, “The variation in economic risk premium s”, Journal
of Political Economy, 1991, 99(2), 385-415.
[39] E. Fama and K. French, “The cross-section of expected stoc k returns”, Journal
of Finance, 1992, 47(2), 427-465.
[40] E. Fama and K. French, “Common risk factors in the returns of stock and
bonds”, Journal of Financial Economics, 1993, 33(1), 3-56.
[41] N. Jegadeesh and S. Titman, “Returns to buying winners and se lling losers:
Implications for stock market eﬃciency”, Journal of Finance, 199 3, 48(1), 65-
91.
[42] R. Whitelaw, “Time variations and covariations in the expectation and volatil-
ity of stock market returns”, Journal of Finance, 1994, 49(2), 515-541.
[43] A.C. MacKinlay, “Multifactor models do not explain deviations from the
CAPM”, Journal of Financial Economics, 1995, 38(1), 3-28.
[44] R. Jagannathan and Z. Wang, “The conditional CAPM and the cr oss-section
of expected returns”, Journal of Finance, 1996, 51(1), 3-53.
[45] E. Fama and K. French, “Multifactor explanations for asset pr icing anomalies”,
Journal of Finance, 1996, 51(1), 55-94.
[46] S. Kothari and J. Shanken, “Book-to-market, dividend yield a nd expected mar-
ket returns: A time series analysis”, Journal of Financial Economic s, 1997,
44(2), 169-203.
[47] W.FersonandC. Harvey, “Conditioning variablesandthecross sectionofstock
returns”, Journal of Finance, 1999, 54(4), 1325-1360.
[48] C. Fern´ andez, E. Ley and M. Steel, “Benchmark priors for ba yesian model
averaging”, Journal of Econometrics, 2001, 100(2), 381-427.
22[49] A.D.Hall, S. Hwang andE.S. Satchell, “Using bayesian variableselec tion meth-
ods to choose style factors in global stock return models”, Journ al of Banking
and Finance, 2002, 26(12), 2301-2325.
[50] B.G. Malkiel, “The eﬃcient market hypothesis and its critics”, The Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 2003, 17(1), 59-82.
[51] L.K.C. Chan and L. Lakonishok, “Value and growth investing: Rev iew and
update”, Financial Analysts Journal, 2004, 60(1), 71-86.
[52] O. Ledoit and M. Wolf, “Honey, I shrunk the sample covariance m atrix”, Jour-
nal of Portfolio Management, 2004, 30(4), 110-119.
[53] D.J. Disatnik andS. Benninga, “Shrinking the covariance matrix” , The Journal
of Portfolio Management, 2007, 33(4), 55-63.
[54] M.J. Cooper, H. Gulen and M.J. Schill, “Asset growth and the Cros s-Section
of stock returns”, The Journal of Finance, 2008, 63(4), 1609- 1651.
[55] S. Hwang and A. Rubesam, “Fishing with a licence: An empirical sea rch for as-
set pricing factors”, http://ssrn.com/abstract=1297376 (SSR NWorking Paper,
2008).
[56] T. Adriana and F. Franzoni, “Learning about beta: Time-varyin g factor load-
ings, expected returns, and the conditional CAPM”, Journal of E mpirical Fi-
nance, 2009, 16(4), 537-556.
[57] W. He, Y.S. Lee and P. Wei, “Do option traders on value and growt h stocks
react diﬀerently to new information?”, Review of Quantitative Finan ce and
Accounting, 2010, 34(3), 371-381.
[58] P.MaioandP.Santa-Clara, “Value, momentum, andshort-ter minterest rates”,
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1986787 (SSRN Working Paper, 2011 ).
[59] J.G. Rangel and R.F. Engle, “The Factor-Spline-GARCH Model fo r High and
Low Frequency Correlations”, Journal of Business and Economic S tatistics,
2012, 30(1), 109-124.
[60] M. Fliess and C. Join, “Systematic and multifactor risk models rev isited”,
arXiv:1312.5271.
[61] H. Markowitz, “Portfolio selection”, Journal of Finance, 1952 , 7(1), 77-91.
[62] A. Charnes and W.W. Cooper, “Programming with linear fractiona l function-
als”, Naval Research Logistics Quarterly, 1962, 9(3-4), 181-18 6.
[63] W.F. Sharpe, “Mutual fund performance”, Journal of Busine ss, 1966, 39(1),
119-138.
23[64] R.C. Merton, “Lifetime portfolio selection under uncertainty: t he continuous
time case”, The Review of Economics and Statistics, 1969, 51(3), 2 47-257.
[65] S. Schaible, “Parameter-free convex equivalent and dual pro grams of fractional
programming problems”, Zeitschrift f¨ ur Operations Research, 1 974, 18(5), 187-
196.
[66] M. Magill and G. Constantinides, “Portfolio selection with transa ctions costs”,
J. Econom. Theory, 1976, 13(2), 245-263.
[67] A.F. Perold, “Large-scale portfolio optimization”, Management Science, 1984,
30(10), 1143-1160.
[68] M. Davis and A. Norman, “Portfolio selection with transaction co sts”, Math.
Oper. Res., 1990, 15(4), 676-713.
[69] B. Dumas and E. Luciano, “An exact solution to a dynamic portfo lio choice
problemundertransactioncosts”, TheJournalofFinance, 1991 ,46(2),577-595.
[70] C. J. Adcock and N. Meade “A simple algorithm to incorporate tra nsactions
costs in quadratic optimization”, European Journal of Operationa l Research,
1994, 79(1), 85-94.
[71] S. Shreve and H.M. Soner, “Optimal investment and consumptio n with trans-
action costs”, Ann. Appl. Probab., 1994, 4(3), 609-692.
[72] D. Bienstock, “Computational study of a family of mixed-intege r quadratic
programming problems”, Mathematical Programming, 1996, 74(2) , 121-140.
[73] J. Cvitani´ c and I. Karatzas, “Hedging and portfolio optimizat ion under trans-
action costs: a martingale approach”, Math. Finance, 1996, 6(2) , 133-165.
[74] A. Yoshimoto, “The mean-variance approach to portfolio optim ization subject
totransactioncosts”, J.OperationsResearchSoc.ofJapan, 1 996,39(1),99-117.
[75] C. Atkinson, S.R. Pliska and P. Wilmott, “Portfolio management wit h trans-
action costs”, Proc. Roy. Soc. London Ser. A, 1997, 453(1958) , 551-562.
[76] D. Bertsimas, C. Darnell and R. Soucy, “Portfolio constructio n through mixed-
integer programming at Grantham, Mayo, Van Otterloo and Compan y”, Inter-
faces, 1999, 29(1), 49-66.
[77] A. Cadenillas and S. R. Pliska, “Optimal trading of a security when there are
taxes and transaction costs”, Finance and Stochastics, 1999, 3 (2), 137-165.
[78] R.C. Grinold and R.N. Kahn, “Active Portfolio Management: Quant itative
Theory and Applications”, 2nd ed., McGraw-Hill, 2000.
24[79] T.-J. Chang, N. Meade, J.E. Beasley and Y.M. Sharaiha, “Heurist ics for car-
dinality constrained portfolio optimisation”, Computers and Operat ions Re-
search, 2000, 27(13), 1271-1302.
[80] H. Kellerer, R. Mansini and M.G. Speranza, “Selecting portfolios with ﬁxed
costs and minimum transaction lots”, Annals of Operations Researc h, 2000,
99(1-4), 287-304.
[81] R.T. Rockafellar and S. Uryasev, “Optimization of conditional va lue-at-risk”,
Journal of Risk, 2000, 2(3), 21-41.
[82] J. Gondzio and R. Kouwenberg, “High-performance computing for asset-
liability management”, Operations Research, 2001, 49(6), 879-89 1.
[83] H. Konno and A. Wijayanayake, “Portfolio optimization problem u nder con-
cavetransactioncosts andminimaltransactionunitconstraints” , Mathematical
Programming, 2001, 89(2), 233-250.
[84] S. Mokkhavesa and C. Atkinson, “Perturbation solution of opt imal portfolio
theory with transaction costs for any utility function”, IMA J. Man ag. Math.,
2002, 13(2), 131-151.
[85] O.L.V. Costa and A.C. Paiva, “Robust portfolio selection using linea r-matrix
inequalities”, Journal ofEconomic DynamicsandControl, 2002, 26( 6), 889-909.
[86] F.AlizadehandD.Goldfarb, “Second-orderconeprogramming ”, Mathematical
Programming, 2003, 95(1), 3-51.
[87] M.J. Best and J. Hlouskova, “Portfolio selection and transactio ns costs”, Com-
putational Optimization and Applications, 2003, 24(1), 95-116.
[88] K. Janeˇ cek and S. Shreve, “Asymptotic analysis for optimal in vestment and
consumption with transaction costs”, Finance Stoch., 2004, 8(2) , 181-206.
[89] R. Grinold, “A Dynamic Model of Portfolio Management”, Journa l of Invest-
ment Management, 2006, 4(2), 5-22.
[90] R. Grinold, “Dynamic Portfolio Analysis”, Journal of Portfolio Ma nagement,
2007, 34(1), 12-26.
[91] E. Qian, R. Hua and E. Sorensen, “Quantitative Equity Portfolio Management:
Modern Techniques and Applications”, New York, NY: Chapman & Hall, 2007.
[92] M.S. Lobo, M. Fazel and S. Boyd, “Portfolio optimization with linea r and ﬁxed
transaction costs”, Annals of Operations Research, 2007, 152( 1), 341-365.
[93] R. Zagst and D. Kalin, “Portfolio optimization under liquidity costs ”, Interna-
tional Journal of Pure and Applied Mathematics, 2007, 39(2), 217 -233.
25[94] M.Potaptchik, L.Tun¸ cel andH.Wolkowicz, “Largescaleport foliooptimization
with piecewise linear transaction costs”, Optimization Methods and S oftware,
2008, 23(6), 929-952.
[95] E. Moro, J. Vicente, L.G. Moyano, A. Gerig, J.D. Farmer, G. Vag lica, F. Lillo
and R.N. Mantegna, “Market impact and trading proﬁle of hidden ord ers in
stock markets”, Physical Review E, 2009, 80, 066102.
[96] R. Grinold, ‘ ‘Signal Weighting”, The Journal of Portfolio Manage ment, 2010,
36(4), 24-34.
[97] J. Goodman and D.N. Ostrov, “Balancing small transaction cost s with loss of
optimal allocation in dynamic stock trading strategies”, SIAM J. App l. Math.,
2010, 70(6), 1977-1998.
[98] M. Bichuch, “Asymptotic analysis for optimal investment in ﬁnite time with
transaction costs”, SIAM J. Financial Math., 2012, 3(1), 433-45 8.
[99] J.E. Mitchell and S. Braun, “Rebalancing an investment portfolio in the pres-
ence of convex transaction costs, including market impact costs” , Optimization
Methods and Software, 2013, 28(3), 523-542.
[100] H.SonerandN.Touzi, “Homogenizationandasymptoticsfors malltransaction
costs”, SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, 2013, 51(4), 2893-2921.
[101] Z. Kakushadze and J.K.-S. Liew, “Is It Possible to OD on Alpha?” ,
SSRN Working Paper, http://ssrn.com/abstract=2419415 (April 2, 2014);
arXiv:1404.0746.
[102] Z. Kakushadze, “Spectral Model of Turnover Reduction”, SSRN Working Pa-
per, http://ssrn.com/abstract=2427049 (April 20, 2014); arX iv:1404.5050.
[103] Z. Kakushadze, “Can Turnover Go To Zero?”, Journal of De rivatives & Hedge
Funds (in press), SSRN Accepted Paper, http://ssrn.com/abstr act=2444031
(May 30, 2014); arXiv:1406.0044.
[104] R. Rebonato and P. J¨ ackel, “The most general methodology to create a valid
correlation matrix for risk management and option pricing purposes ” (1999),
SSRN Working Paper, http://ssrn.com/abstract=1969689 (Dece mber 7, 2011).
[105] Z. Kakushadze, “Combining Alpha Streams with Costs”, The Jo urnal of Risk
(in press), SSRN Accepted Paper, http://ssrn.com/abstract=2 438687 (May 19,
2014); arXiv:1405.4716.
[106] Z. Kakushadze, “Notes on Alpha Stream Optimization”, SSRN W orking Pa-
per, http://ssrn.com/abstract=2446328 (June 4, 2014), arXiv :1406.1249.
26