Eurographics Conference on Visualization (EuroVis) 2021
R. Borgo, G. E. Marai, and T. von Landesberger
(Guest Editors)Volume 40 (2021 ),Number 3
iQUANT: Interactive Quantitative Investment Using Sparse
Regression Factors
Xuanwu Yue1;4
, Qiao Gu2
, Deyun Wang3
, Huamin Qu4
and Yong Wang5
1Sinovation Ventures AI Institute, China
2Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, USA
3Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
4The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China
5School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore
Abstract
The model-based investing using ﬁnancial factors is evolving as a principal method for quantitative investment. The main
challenge lies in the selection of effective factors towards excess market returns. Existing approaches, either hand-picking
factors or applying feature selection algorithms, do not orchestrate both human knowledge and computational power. This
paper presents iQUANT, an interactive quantitative investment system that assists equity traders to quickly spot promising
ﬁnancial factors from initial recommendations suggested by algorithmic models, and conduct a joint reﬁnement of factors and
stocks for investment portfolio composition. We work closely with professional traders to assemble empirical characteristics of
“good” factors and propose effective visualization designs to illustrate the collective performance of ﬁnancial factors, stock
portfolios, and their interactions. We evaluate iQUANT through a formal user study, two case studies, and expert interviews,
using a real stock market dataset consisting of 3000 stocks 6000 days56 factors.
CCS Concepts
•Human-centered computing !Visual analytics; Visualization design and evaluation methods; Information visualization;
1. Introduction
Quantitative investment using algorithmic trading has accounted
for over 85% of transactions in US stock markets since 2012
[GK13]. There is a growing demand for machine learning mod-
els that can describe and explain the price change of an individual
or a portfolio of stocks in the market. Factor investing is one of
the most widely used strategies in quantitative investment. In a fac-
tor investing paradigm [Tsi18, FF92, FF04], a selective collection
of ﬁnancial variables called factors (e.g., a company’s fundamental
data and its growth measures) are used as input predictors and stock
returns are set as target outcomes to build predictive models. With
these models, traders forecast future stock returns regularly in or-
der to construct time-sensitive portfolios composed of a small set of
high-return securities. The returns of these securities are expected
to beat the average market return, which is known as the excess re-
turn. Recent global surveys show that the factor investing paradigm
is employed by 90% of institutional investors to manage at least
part of their portfolio [MAHG16]. The percentage of assets traded
with factor investing is over 30% in size and still fast-growing.
Despite the prevalence of factor investing, selecting an effective
set of factors for market investment is a difﬁcult task. There can be
hundreds of candidate factors or more available for predictive mod-els. Currently, most quantitative traders manually select factors by
comparing their corresponding portfolio returns in a standard back-
testing. Such a trial-and-error approach is indirect, less intuitive,
and often requires an exhaustive search in the vast combinatorial
factor space. To compute returns from a set of factors, a predictive
model and stock portfolio need to be constructed, whose interac-
tions with the selected factors are not fully understood and utilized
in the current approach. Traders must also speculate an initial fac-
tor selection for evaluation. On the other hand, feature selection
methods in machine learning research [GE03] have been applied
to this domain, but not as an end-to-end approach like many other
ﬁelds. Algorithm-selected factors are mostly used as a reference or
starting point of the manual selection process, as these factors (es-
pecially in black-box models) are not trusted by traders until they
can be explained and evaluated. There are currently few tools that
can combine human intelligence (e.g., prior knowledge of a fac-
tor’s utility) and computational power (e.g., assessing stability and
sensitivity of a factor) for factor selection in stock markets.
This work is committed to three essential requirements of inter-
active factor investing. First, traders need an intuitive and compre-
hensive way to assess the performance of numerous factors with
respect to excess returns. Second, high-performance factors need
to be selected and reﬁned together with high-return stocks in the
© 2021 The Author(s)
Computer Graphics Forum © 2021 The Eurographics Association and John
Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.arXiv:2104.11485v1  [cs.HC]  23 Apr 2021Xuanwu Yue et al. / iQUANT: Interactive Quantitative Investment Using Sparse Regression Factors
construction of an investment portfolio. Third, portfolios need to
be evaluated and compared in the industry-standard backtesting for
their returns in both past and future outlook. To meet these re-
quirements, we present iQUANT (i nteractive Q uantitative invest-
ment U sing spA rse regressioN facTors), a visual analytics system
that seamlessly integrates human and algorithmic factor selection
for effective factor investing in stock markets. iQUANT enjoys the
best of both worlds from human intelligence by a heuristic search
in the combinatorial factor space and from computational power
by summarizing and presenting key performance metrics of factors
and stocks in close interactions. The contributions of this work can
be summarized as follows.
We explore the use of sparse regression models as the initial
feature selection method for factor investing. Sparse regression
models are preferred as they optimize the procedure between fac-
tor selection and stock prediction in the same process. Perfor-
mance metrics of factors are computed, including not only their
feature weights, but also the factor contribution that describes its
importance to the prediction.
We introduce elaborate visualization designs that comprehen-
sively illustrate the performance of factors in the regression
model to predict the prices of candidate stocks. Our designs are
based on expert studies about empirical characteristics of valu-
able factors, including stability and sensitivity.
On top of the visualization interface, we propose an interaction
framework for factor investing that allows traders to jointly se-
lect high-performance factors and high-return stocks in an in-
tegrated model-building and portfolio-construction process. By
our framework, traders can iteratively reﬁne the factor selection
and stock portfolio based on visual evidence shown in the inter-
face. The industry-standard backtesting is also supported.
We evaluate iQUANT in a formal user study comparing with
baseline alternatives. Case studies with domain experts on tar-
geted user tasks are conducted using a real stock market dataset.
Expert feedback about iQUANT is also reported and discussed.
2. Related Work
2.1. Financial Data Visualization
Financial data, such as stock/fund prices and economic indicators,
has been widely used by traders and investors to guide their in-
vestment decisions. Many visualization approaches have been pro-
posed to support interactive analysis of ﬁnancial data in the past
decades [KCA16, DML14, Teg99, RKD16, TLL20, LWW20].
Since the target users are often not visualization experts, classi-
cal designs such as line charts and bar charts are popular in ﬁ-
nancial visualization for better usability [CGK07,ZJGK10,SB13,
YSZ19, YBL19]. For example, Chang et al. [CGK07] applied
multiple coordinated views with enhanced line charts and matrix
designs to illustrate the time-varying wire transactions in banking.
Ziegler et al. [ZJGK10] designed color-coded bars to display rela-
tive changes in asset prices over time. Sorenson and Brath [SB13]
combined continuous line charts with icon-based event representa-
tions to inform users about the important context of ﬁnancial data.
With the ever-increasing data size, ﬁnancial visualization methods
are often integrated with automatic analytics to support visual anal-
ysis of ﬁnancial data [Šim03, STKF07, SBTK08, VV99, ZJGK10].Meanwhile, versatile visualizations beyond classical charts have
also been developed to cope with the complexity of modern ﬁ-
nancial data, e.g., Growth Matrix [KNS06,ZNK07], wedge charts
[DBBS08], and 3D visualizations [TS08, NB04].
Currently, few studies have been done in integrating visual-
ization into the factor investing process. Some existing stud-
ies [CHL03,RSE09,SLFE11] apply visualizations to help manage
investment portfolios. FundExplorer [CHL03] introduces a dis-
torted treemap to visualize both the composition of a fund’s port-
folio and the remaining stocks. Their design facilitates the conve-
nient retrieval of complementary funds to achieve portfolio diversi-
ﬁcation. FinVis [RSE09] employs visualization to help non-experts
understand the expected returns, risks and the changing context of
multiple portfolios. PortfolioCompare [SLFE11] displays the vari-
ability and correlation of a portfolio’s risks and returns by scatter-
plots and distribution charts. Their designs can assist users in mak-
ing better investments according to their risk preferences. None of
these visualization tools is integrated with predictive and feature
selection models for factor investing.
2.2. Interactive Feature Selection
Feature selection is a key step in machine learning. Prior studies
have focused on algorithmic feature selections [LCW17], whose
mechanism and reasoning are often opaque to users. Inspired
by prior research on predictive model visualization [LXL18,
PKWQ20,ZWLC19,MQB19,EASD19], interactive feature selec-
tions have been widely studied. These studies allow users to vi-
sually explore the feature space by novel representations and in-
teractive interfaces. Seo and Shneiderman [JS04] proposed a rank-
by-feature framework for the exploration of multidimensional data.
Data features are ranked and visualized by scatter plots, bar charts,
etc. Johansson and Johansson [JJ09] utilized parallel coordinates to
visualize data features, with the order determined by user-deﬁned
metrics.
On the other hand, there are some works considering the re-
lationship between features and predictive models. For example,
SmartStripes [MBD11] combines interactive feature selection by
allowing users to explore the dependencies between features and
algorithms. INFUSE [KPB14] integrates feature selection with pre-
diction models and a glyph-based design to inform users about the
feature performance with respect to the prediction performance.
iFEED [BS16] and FeatureMiner [CLL16] visualize the feature
performance by line charts, bar charts and scatter plots. Prospec-
tor [KPN16] applies partial dependence diagnostics to analyze the
correlation among features, data values, and prediction results. Re-
gressionExplorer [DvVH19] combines feature space visualization
of regression models with a dynamic subgroup of data analysis.
Existing studies summarize the feature dependency or perfor-
mance by hybrid quality measures (e.g., feature ranking), but the
temporal evolution of features are rarely considered. In factor in-
vesting, the temporal dynamics of ﬁnancial factors (features) and
their inﬂuence on the prediction model are crucial, which makes
existing work not suitable for our scenario.
3. System Overview
In this section, the technical background of interactive factor invest-
ing is introduced, on which key user requirements are summarized.
© 2021 The Author(s)
Computer Graphics Forum © 2021 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.Xuanwu Yue et al. / iQUANT: Interactive Quantitative Investment Using Sparse Regression Factors
To meet these requirements, four user tasks are deﬁned which are
achieved by a pipeline design in our system.
3.1. Background
Historically, factor investing originated from the Capital Asset
Pricing Model (CAPM) proposed by Sharpe [Sha64] and Linter
[Lin65], which uses a single factor of a stock’s sensitivity to market
returns to explain stock returns. Then, researchers and practitioners
continued to discover new factors related to stock returns. Notably,
Fama and French [FF92] proposed the famous three-factor model
which considers a size factor (large v.s. small capitalization stocks)
and a value factor (high v.s. low book-to-market ratios) in addi-
tion to the market sensitivity factor. Later, many factors explaining
stock returns were discovered, including a company’s recent fun-
damental data [Asn97], the long-term income growth of compa-
nies [PLdSSV98, DS97], etc.
In a typical quantitative investment scenario for stock markets,
traders hold a portfolio composed of a collection of individual
stocks appropriately mixed in value. The portfolio is adjusted in
regular time intervals, which is also known as the trading cycle.
Depending on the style of traders and funds, the trading cycle can
range from one day/week (e.g., private equity) to several months
(e.g., public funds). By the factor investing paradigm, at the begin-
ning of each trading cycle, traders pick a few factors based on their
experience, domain knowledge, market status and factor returns.
Quantitative models are then built up over historical market data,
which try to establish linkages between factors and stock returns.
Both machine learning and statistical models have been applied in
this stage [CG20]. From model-predicted stock returns, traders fur-
ther apply a trading strategy to determine how to adjust their in-
vestment assets, i.e., when and which stocks to buy/sell. Because
it is extremely hard to forecast how the portfolio adjustment deci-
sion performs in the upcoming trading cycle, a standard backtesting
helps to evaluate its returns on historical data. The model consis-
tently earns excess returns to the market, or at least in recent cycles,
is considered good in the context of quantitative investment.
3.2. Task Characterization
The factor investing paradigm introduced above seems straightfor-
ward. However, due to the closedness of the quantitative investment
community, we only came to this understanding after pilot studies
with expert traders in several mutual funds, both public and pri-
vate ones. In the interviews, almost all of them mentioned a key
difﬁculty in the factor investing practice, the selection of valuable
factors. While during their long-term jobs, a number of factor com-
binations proven in the past have been accumulated, they never stop
ﬁnding and evaluating new factors because stock ﬂuctuations in the
future can hardly be entirely the same as the past. In a sense, the
ability to discover new factors is the central competence of quanti-
tative traders and accounts for most of their performance difference.
As we learned from experts in the interview, the current factor
selection process is mostly done manually. A major user pain point
lies in that the evaluation of selected factors are indirect, less intu-
itive, and often requires an exhaustive search in the vast combinato-
rial factor space to identify the best factor collection. In the standard
backtesting of quantitative models, to be able to compute model re-
turns, the learning/statistical algorithm and the focused stock needto be determined in addition to the factor selection. Importantly,
these model returns are often the result of interactions among fac-
tor, model and stock selections. Users often require a tedious trial-
and-error comparison process to determine factors. As such a pro-
cess is done in every trading cycle, efﬁciency is also a critical con-
sideration not to be neglected. Meanwhile, automatic factor selec-
tions by machine learning algorithms (e.g., feature selection) have
been incorporated in a trader’s job. Due to explainability concerns,
these algorithm-picked factors are only used as a starting point or
reference for manual factor selection until traders can understand
their working mechanism. To this end, interactive factor investing
systems that can integrate feature selection, model building, and
human intelligence in heuristic factor search, as well as visually
explain selected factors are of great demand. Below we summarize
key user requirements collected from our expert studies.
R1. Direct and intuitive factor evaluation. As there are a large
number of candidate factors, for a given pool of stocks, the system
should recommend an initial factor selection for users to start with
(R1.1 ). Importance measures of these factors should be computed
in the context of quantitative models to account for the interaction
between factors and models. These factor importance and the per-
formance of underlying stock/model need to be presented compre-
hensively to allow intuitive factor evaluation ( R1.2 ).
R2. Interaction support for factor and portfolio selection.
Based on evaluations of factor and stock performance, the system
should support appropriate interaction to help construct stock port-
folios to invest. This requires interactions to jointly select and reﬁne
factors and stocks, as well as a mechanism to help users understand.
R3. Integrated model building and backtesting. In the fac-
tor selection and evaluation, the system should automatically train
quantitative models to predict stock returns based on selected fac-
tors and stocks, algorithmically or jointly ( R3.1 ). In factor invest-
ing, backtesting of these models should be performed to compare
portfolio returns and guide investment decisions ( R3.2 ).
To meet the requirements of expert traders, we target to build a
visual analytics system that can support the following key tasks.
T1. Selection of an initial pool of stocks and factors. Traders
can start from all the stocks in the market for their investment analy-
sis. More frequently, s/he focuses on a few sectors (per funder’s re-
quirements) and picked several stocks from each sector to construct
a balanced initial stock portfolio. Our system provides an interface
to allow users to manually determine the initial stock portfolio from
the list of stocks organized by sectors. Initial factor selections are
automatically recommended based on the stock portfolio. ( R1.1 )
T2. Evaluation of factors through visualization. Our system
illustrates the performance of individual factors in a comprehensive
visualization interface. Users can visually identify valuable factors
by examining key dimensions such as stability and sensitivity. The
stock returns of quantitative models are also displayed. ( R1.2 )
T3. Interactive joint factor reﬁnement and portfolio adjust-
ment. Traders select factors and stocks to construct investment
portfolios in an interactive and iterative manner. Upon each reﬁne-
ment of factors or stock portfolio, the stock return of the resulting
model is displayed immediately, which provides visual evidence
for user’s heuristic factor search. ( R2)
© 2021 The Author(s)
Computer Graphics Forum © 2021 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.Xuanwu Yue et al. / iQUANT: Interactive Quantitative Investment Using Sparse Regression Factors
T4. Evaluation and comparison of portfolio returns. To com-
pute portfolio returns, quantitative models are automatically built
up over selected factors ( R3.1 ). Traders compare the temporal dy-
namics of returns from alternative portfolios and select the best
portfolio in a standard backtesting ( R3.2 ).
3.3. System Design
We propose iQUANT, a visual analytics system supporint all the
four user tasks deﬁned above. iQUANT features a pipelined design
as shown in Figure 1. In the ﬁrst stage, the system takes three types
of stock market data. The ﬁrst type is stock transaction data, notably
the stock daily opening/closing prices. The second type is market
information, including but not limited to ﬁnancial statements (total
assets, debts, cash ﬂows, etc.), market news, and ﬁnancial reports.
The third and most critical part of data are factors computed from
stock transactions and market information, which is used in our sys-
tem for user selection and model building. In this application, we
apply data from a major stock market consisting of 3,000 stocks
during 30 years (1990-2018). The data is collected from both ex-
ternal sources (e.g., open APIs for transaction data) or by internal
computations (e.g., ﬁnancial factors). The underlying technique of
our system can be easily extended to support other stock markets.
In the second stage of Figure 1, we integrate a sparse regression
model to carry out factor selection and return prediction simultane-
ously. The performance of selected factors and predictive models
are visualized in iQUANT . The result of interactive factor invest-
ing is evaluated in a standard backtesting view in the ﬁnal stage.
The iQUANT system is a web-based full-stack application. All
data are stored in MongoDB. The front-ends use Vue.js and D3.js
libraries. The sparse regression model is time-consuming. How-
ever, it only takes20 seconds in the back-end to compute a sector
(dozen) of stocks and respond to the web browser. All performance
is measured in a laptop requesting a four-CPU cloud server. We
expect to upgrade the server to further reduce computation time.
4. Predictive Analytics
4.1. Sparse Regression Model
The interactive factor investing approach takes two steps to make
ﬁnal decisions on portfolio adjustment. First, the collection of ﬁ-
nancial factors are used to build models on the pool of candidate
stocks for investment. Second, traders evaluate the predicted stock
returns by the model and decide on the portfolio adjustment. In
iQUANT, the second step is achieved by user interactions with the
interface to understand the model output, and using existing trad-
ing strategies/algorithms (beyond the scope of this paper). In this
part, we describe a suite of sparse regression models applied in the
ﬁrst step to jointly recommend factors (i.e. feature selection) and
predict stock returns (i.e., model optimization). The sparse regres-
sion model is a popularly-used one in industry. Users can replace
it with other statistics/machine learning models with similar output
format. We include the sparse regression model to demonstrate the
workﬂow of iQUANT.
Consider the model for a stock ¡during a time period of G=
[T+1;T+L], where Lis the length of Gand any time t2Gin-
dicates the tth trading day. Gis further partitioned into Ntrading
Figure 1: iQUANT system pipeline composed of two modules: the sparse
regression model for feature selection and prediction, and the visualization
of factors and stocks for factor selection and portfolio construction.
cycles:f[T+1;T+D];;[T+ (N 1)D+1;T+ND]g, where
Dindicates the length of a trading cycle by days, D=L=N. Take
the ﬁrst trading cycle t1= [T+1;T+D]as an example, the
market information in a previous training period [1;T]is used
in the predictive modeling. Tdenotes the ﬁxed length of train-
ing period by days. Similarly, for the modeling of the ith trad-
ing cycle ti= [T+ (i 1)D+1;T+iD], the training period of
[(i 1)D+1;(i 1)D+T]is used.
On stock ¡, denote the actual daily stock returns by percent-
age in the time period [1;T+L+1]byy= (y1;;yT+L+1). Let
the model take Ffactors as input. Their normalized factor values
in[1;T+L+1]compose a matrix X= (x1;;xT+L+1)where
xi= (xi1;;xiF)0. The modeling of stock ¡inGtakes Nsteps,
corresponding to the trading cycles of t1;;tN, respectively. Con-
sider the ith trading cycle ti, a sub-vector of actual stock returns is
used as outcomes, denoted by y(i)= (y(i 1)D+2;;y(i 1)D+T+1).
A sub-factor-matrix is used as the design matrix (predictors), de-
noted by X(i)= (x(i 1)D+1;;x(i 1)D+T). We ﬁt a sparse regres-
sion model:
y(i)=w(i)0X(i)+b(i)+e(i)(1)
Subject to the objective function:
Minimize Lasso NLL=NLL+1
2l[ajjw(n)jj1+(1 a)jjw(n)jj2
2]
(2)
where w(i)= (w(i)
1;;w(i)
F)0denotes the weight vector of ﬁnancial
factors in the ﬁtted model, b(i)is the bias, e(i)is the error term,jjjj 1
(jjjj 2) isL1(L2) norm of the vector. Dis set to 21 (average number
of monthly trading days). The best weight vector is computed by
minimizing the negative log likelihood (NLL) of a linear regression
term plus L1andL2penalty terms of the weight vector. The penalty
terms shrink the weight of unimportant factors to zero. On each
trading cycle, the model is applied to predict daily stock returns.
Note that landain Eq. (2) control the degree of model sparsity
and weights between L1andL2terms. In this work, we provide
three choices of modeling: a=1 (without the L2term), the famous
Lasso model [Tib96] with a ﬁxed l;LassoCV model using 10-
fold cross-validation to determine lof the Lasso model [UGH09];
anda=0:5, a balanced Elastic Net model ( ELNetApp ) [ZH05].
The trade-off of the three models in predictive performance and
the number of selected features can be found in recent literature
[Tib96] [UGH09] [ZH05].
© 2021 The Author(s)
Computer Graphics Forum © 2021 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.Xuanwu Yue et al. / iQUANT: Interactive Quantitative Investment Using Sparse Regression Factors
(a) (b)
(c)(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 2: Interactive selection of four stocks from the Chemical sector in 2015 using a two-factor model ( lagretn +stddvol): (a) control panel; (b) factor view;
(c) stock view by sectors; (d) factor list for selection; (e) stock return view for portfolio construction; (f) backtesting view for evaluation of returns.
The sparse regression model achieves feature selection ( L1and
L2penalty terms) and model optimization (regression term) simul-
taneously. This is extremely helpful to alleviate the overﬁtting ef-
fect in the factor investing case when the number of predictors
(F=56 in our implementation) is comparable to the number of
training samples ( T=200). Though we apply a basic linear regres-
sion for stock prediction, the sparse models with L1andL2penal-
ties can be easily extended to support more sophisticated models
such as nonlinear models using customized kernel functions.
4.2. Financial Factors
For factor computation, we adopt the result of a latest white paper
on the target stock market [Tsi18], which recommends six types of
56 factors with each factor characterizes a key aspect of a stock:
Transaction friction : 17 factors delineating overall status of a
company (e.g., ﬁrm size by its market value, age of a ﬁrm) and
transaction statistics (e.g., volatility, risks measured by stock re-
turns compared with the market return);
Momentum : 5 factors computing daily stock returns in the re-
cent 6/12 months, the change of momentum, and specially de-
ﬁned momentums;
Value : 8 factors including the famous book-to-market ratio pro-
posed by Fama and French [FF92], the asset-to-market ratio, and
other company performance related ratios;
Growth : 11 factors describing the growth of a company’s asset,
debt, market value, sales, proﬁt, tax, etc;
Proﬁtability : 8 factors quantifying return on equity, return on
asset, and other factors related to company proﬁts;
Liquidity : 7 factors characterizing the liquidity performance of
a company, including current ratio, quick ratio, cash ﬂow to debt
ratio, etc.For the above factors, the ranges of their values differ signiﬁ-
cantly from each other. Also, their values can change dramatically
along with the stock market. Since all the factor values are nor-
malized initially, the relative importance of each factor can be as-
sessed, which can facilitate the factor analysis. The sparse regres-
sion model in iQUANT outputs three measures to delineate the im-
portance of each factor in the prediction. Take the jth factor in the
ith trading cycle (e.g., daily, monthly or quarterly) as an example,
the three measures are as follows:
Factor weight learned in the model, denoted by w(i)
j;
Factor value changing in a daily basis, denoted by X(i);
Contribution of factors to the prediction of daily stock returns,
denoted by åT+iD
k=T+(i 1)D+1w(i)
jxk j.
By collecting the feedback from traders in our pilot study, we
further extracted three metrics that are widely-used in industry to
delineate the utilization of each factor. These two metrics are visu-
alized in iQUANT to aid the interactive factor selection and stock
portfolio construction process.
Sensitivity : a metric that indicates whether the utilization of a
factor can be replaced by other factors. The sensitivity is com-
puted by (xi
 j xi)+where xi
 jdenotes the prediction error by
removing the jth factor from sparse regression models, xide-
notes the prediction error of the original model;
Stability : a good factor for the predictive model should have sta-
ble contributions in a long period of time before conﬁdently ap-
plied. Quantitatively, it is measured by the number of times the
factor’s contribution to a stock’s prediction ﬂips from negative to
positive or from positive to negative.
© 2021 The Author(s)
Computer Graphics Forum © 2021 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.Xuanwu Yue et al. / iQUANT: Interactive Quantitative Investment Using Sparse Regression Factors
5. Visualization
5.1. Control Panel
The control panel in Figure 2(a) allows users to select an initial
pool of stocks for analysis ( T1). S/he can input the stock code to
select an individual stock or choose an entire sector of stocks from
a sector list. All the selected stocks will appear in the bottom part of
the control panel, aggregated by sectors. Next, users need to specify
a time period and a model for factor investing. Finally, users click
the “Draw” button to visualize factors related to the selected stocks.
5.2. Factor View
Factor view (Figure 2(b)) is designed to provide traders with a
quick overview of ﬁnancial factors relevant to the selected stocks
and time period. These factors are initially recommended by sparse
models in iQUANT ( T1). The model measures the importance of
each factor by its weight, value, or contribution to the prediction of
stock returns. By default, traders ﬁrst look at the contribution mea-
sure which covers both its current value and the overall weight. The
contribution can be either positive or negative depending on the re-
lationship between the factor and stock returns. According to our
expert study, they also consider several other metrics in the factor
evaluation and selection process, including the temporal stability of
factors and their sensitivity in the model. ( T2)
To meet the above design requirements, we propose a cus-
tomized visual design to integrate time-varying factor importance
metrics in a single factor view. As shown in Figure 2(b), the x-axis
of the view indicates a timeline divided into multiple time units
(months by default). Each factor is visualized as a series of ﬁlled
circles in these time units. On each circle, the color hue encodes
factor type, the color opacity encodes the factor sensitivity to the
model, and the circle radius represents the aggregated factor im-
portance to all the selected stocks. Three importance metrics can
be displayed by the checkboxes in the top row of the factor view:
weight, value, and contribution (default). All the circles on the same
time unit are vertically aligned by a ﬁxed order of their correspond-
ing factors to facilitate factor tracking and comparison along the
timeline. As each factor can have a positive or negative contribu-
tion in different time units, we depict positive and negative factors
as circles above and below the x-axis respectively.
User interactions are designed in the factor view to help identify
useful factors for modeling. When a user hovers a factor circle, all
the circles representing the same factor are linked by a curved line
to reveal its stability over time. (Figure 2(b)). Also, a tooltip will
be displayed, showing the detailed information of the factor circle
such as factor type, name, sensitivity and importance metric. The
user can interactively ﬁlter factors to reduce visual complexity.
Alternative designs of the factor view have been considered.
The line chart is the most intuitive form to visualize factor impor-
tance over time. When we have as many as 56 factors, line charts
suffer from severe visual clutter. Stacked ﬂow chart [BW08] is an-
other possible visual design. A quick overview of factor composi-
tion can be provided, but it is not good at displaying the temporal
dynamics of individual factors (especially for unimportant factors).
For the circle layout, we also experimented with circle packing
in which positive and negative factors are placed separately. The
Figure 3: Alternative designs of the circle layout in the factor view: (a)
circle packing; (b) layered circle packing.
circle packing leads to more compact visualization (Figure 3(a)).
However, our domain experts complained that the design made it
difﬁcult to track individual factors across the timeline. The relative
position of the same factor circle varied a lot across different time
units. In an improved layered circle packing (Figure 3(b)), which
is similar to a matrix design, the same type of factors is aligned
horizontally. It facilitates tracking of the same factor, but the space
usage is inefﬁcient and the connecting lines on factors lead to heavy
crossings. The current design is a good trade-off between space us-
age and effectiveness compared with other alternative designs.
5.3. Stock View
Stock view (Figure 2(c)) splits the aggregated factor time series in
the factor view according to their importance to individual stocks.
This helps to evaluate the factor performance among different
stocks and sectors ( T2). The visual design is challenging, as the
space for each stock is limited and there could be many factors rel-
evant to a stock. On each factor, there are also multiple attributes to
be visualized, e.g., the magnitude and polarity of importance (con-
tribution), the model bias, and the trend of the stock price.
In our design, the visualization of each stock follows a similar
layout to the display in the factor view. As shown in Figure 2(c), the
x-axis is a timeline divided into units. At each time unit, a stock bar
is drawn (the yellow bar of Figure 6 (d)), whose height represents
the ratio of stock price change in this time unit and width represents
the rate of prediction error on the price change by models. A red
(green) bar indicates a rise (drop) of the stock price. On top of and
below each stock bar, there are two factor glyphs which summarize
the factors having a positive and negative contribution to the price
change in the predictive model.
The factor glyph at the top and bottom in Figure 6 (d) has a
circular shape, and is composed of one inner circle and six angular
sectors in the outside. The radius of the inner circle encodes the
model bias. Each outer sector represents one type of factors, with
the size of each sector indicating the sum of all factor’s importance
in this type. On each factor glyph, the top-5 factors with the high-
est importance in all factor types are displayed. When more than
one factor from the same type belongs to the top-5, a V oronoi di-
agram is drawn to pack these factors in the same angular sector.
Each region in the V oronoi diagram corresponds to one factor, with
the region size indicating its importance. The sum of all the other
factor’s importance out of the top-5 category is represented by the
grey region close to the glyph center. When users hover a V oronoi
region of one factor, a line will be drawn to connect all the V oronoi
regions of this factor over time. Meanwhile, a tooltip showing the
factor type, name and importance will also appear. When the factor
© 2021 The Author(s)
Computer Graphics Forum © 2021 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.Xuanwu Yue et al. / iQUANT: Interactive Quantitative Investment Using Sparse Regression Factors
does not belong to the top-5 category, the line will be linked to zero
position on the x-axis.
Alternative designs such as line chart and stream-
graph [HHN00] are commonly used for visualizing temporal
evolution of variables. In our scenario, the top-5 factors can
be quite different in separate time units, making line charts or
streamgraph discontinuous over time and hard to track by users.
Commodity designs such as stacked bar charts and pie charts
are also considered. Nevertheless, the stacked bar chart is not
scalable to support dozens of factors in the same view. The pie
chart can clearly show the percentage of each factor in importance,
but again the relative position of the same factor can vary a lot
in different units, making it hard to compare the evolution of the
same factor. iQUANT is designed for ﬁnancial factor selection,
which makes it inevitable to consider much domain knowledge
and incorporate different factors in our design. This can increase
the design complexity and it takes some time for user to learn,
but most of our users can be well prepared after a training session
of about 10 minutes as indicated in Section 6.3, which we would
argue is a reasonable learning effort.
5.4. Factor List
Factor list (Figure 2(d)) aggregates factor data together to depict
the overall factor performance ( T2). The six types of factors are
listed in rows, with factors in one type uniformly distributed as fac-
tor bars in the same row. Each factor bar represents the positive and
negative contribution of the factor in the entire time period, using
the height of the bar above and below the x-axis respectively. Users
can manually select factors by clicking factor bars, then the stock
prediction models are re-built using the selected factors after trig-
gering the “Draw” button. The factor performance in the stock view
is also updated for iterative factor/stock selection. ( T3)
5.5. Stock Return View
Stock return view (Figure 2(e)) is organized by sectors. In each ex-
pandable sector box, the investment returns of all stocks in that sec-
tor are calculated by backtesting and displayed in multiple grey line
charts. An additional blue line indicates the market return. Users
could select promising stocks in the stock view and examine their
returns by the lines highlighted in red. The stocks could be selected
in the return view and added into a portfolio table. A “Backtest”
button will trigger the backtesting computation by the selected fac-
tors (factor list) and selected stocks (portfolio table).
5.6. Backtesting View
Backtesting view (Figure 2(f)) evaluates the investment perfor-
mance of the selected portfolio ( T4). Backtesting calculates the
portfolio returns using historical stock data. The blue line indicates
the average return in the market and the grey one indicates the port-
folio return. A dotted line after the selected time period represents
the predicted return in future. Comparison among multiple portfo-
lios is enabled by adding more portfolio from the stock return view.
5.7. Multiple Views Interaction
iQUANT supports interactions among multiple views for compre-
hensive evaluation of factor performance ( T2) and interactive se-
lection of stocks and factors ( T3).Selection of factors : Users can select/de-select factors by click-
ing factor circles in the factor view, V oronoi regions in the stock
view, and factor bars in the factor list. Each change to the factor
selection will trigger updates in all the views simultaneously.
Selection of stocks : An initial collection of stocks can be se-
lected in the control panel. Users can further compose an invest-
ment portfolio by clicking the stock name in the stock view or the
return curve in the stock return view. This helps to interactively
and iteratively reﬁne stock selection according to their returns or
the performance of relevant factors.
6. User Experiment
6.1. Design
We conducted a formal user study to compare the effectiveness of
iQUANT visualization design with a baseline factor visualization
using commodity multiple line charts (See the supplementary mate-
rial for more details of the baseline factor visualization used). Since
there is no efﬁcient tool that can fulﬁll the tasks mentioned in Task
Characterization , we chose to compare iQUANT with the widely-
used line charts in the stock market. In both designs, the time series
of ﬁnancial factors and stock prices were displayed. Users were re-
quired to complete multiple tasks involving the selection of factors
and stocks for investment, which corresponded well with T1T3in
Task Characterization . In total, 14 expert quantitative traders were
recruited as subjects, who were paid for their valuable time. We
applied a between-subject design that subjects were randomly as-
signed to two groups of equal size. The seven subjects in each group
will complete all the tasks with only one visualization, iQUANT or
baseline. The experiment was composed of two sessions. In the ﬁrst
training session, subjects were presented with a tutorial and allowed
a trial usage of iQUANT to be tested. In the subsequent formal test
session, each subject took seven tasks. To alleviate the inﬂuence of
ﬁnancial data on the result and increase statistical power, we pre-
sented two stock data. Each subject was required to complete all
the tasks with both data using the tested visualization. The full doc-
uments of the experiment design are provided in Appendix A. The
user tasks can be categorized into four groups.
Q1/Q2 ( factor selection by contribution ): Among all the factors,
which factors have the highest positive/negative contribution to the
return of a particular stock during a given time period?
Q3 (factor selection by stability ): Among all the factors, which
factors have the highest unstable contribution to the return of a
particular stock during a given time period?
Q4/Q5 ( factor selection by contribution to a sector of stocks ):
Among all the factors, which factors have the highest posi-
tive/negative contribution to the return of all stocks in a particular
sector during a given time period?
Q6/Q7 ( stock selection by factor contribution ): Among all the
stocks in a given sector, whose return receive the highest posi-
tive/negative contribution from a selected factor during a given
time period?
For each question, the subject was required to provide 1 2 an-
swers. Because of the between-subject design, subjects were not
asked for their subjective rating on each visualization (no within-
© 2021 The Author(s)
Computer Graphics Forum © 2021 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.Xuanwu Yue et al. / iQUANT: Interactive Quantitative Investment Using Sparse Regression Factors
subject comparison). Instead, we collected their verbal feedback on
the pros and cons of each design.
6.2. Result and Analysis
We compute the accuracy of each user’s response to a question by
comparing them with top-2 answers. The overall accuracy is mea-
sured by the number of correct answers to each question. In Fig-
ure 4, we depict the accuracy and completion time of four groups
of seven questions. Because both accuracy and time do not follow
normal distributions, we apply the Mann-Whitney test to analyze.
On task accuracy (Figure 4(a)), the result reveals that, for factor
selection by contribution (Q1/Q2), by stability (Q3), and stock se-
lection by factor contribution (Q6/Q7), the accuracy of iQUANT is
signiﬁcantly higher than the baseline design: U=324:0;p=:024
for Q1/Q2; U=30:0;p=:001 for Q3; U=207:0;p< :001
for Q6/Q7. The average task accuracies are 1.14 0.14 (iQUANT)
and 0.960.07 (baseline) for Q1/Q2; 1.29 0.27 (iQUANT) and
0.430.3 (baseline) for Q3; 1.36 0.19 (iQUANT) and 0.82 0.15
(baseline) for Q6/Q7. For factor selection in a sector (Q4/Q5),
the accuracy difference between the iQUANT and baseline is not
signiﬁcant ( U=364:0;p=:15), though the average accuracy of
iQUANT (1.00.0) is higher than the baseline (0.93 0.1).
On task completion time (Figure 4(b)), the result reveals that,
for factor selection by stability (Q3), the completion time using
iQUANT is signiﬁcantly shorter than the baseline design ( U=
30:5;p=:002). The average completion times are 27.2s 3.8s
(iQUANT) and 50.9s 12.8s (baseline). For factor selection by con-
tribution (Q1/Q2), in a sector of stocks (Q4/Q5), and stock se-
lection by factor contribution (Q6/Q7), the completion time us-
ing iQUANT is not signiﬁcantly shorter than the baseline design:
U=359:0;p=:58 for Q1/Q2; U=367:0;p=:68 for Q4/Q5;
U=342:0;p=:41 for Q6/Q7. The average completion times
are 17.1s3.4s (iQUANT) and 16.2 3.6s (baseline) for Q1/Q2;
15.9s3.4s (iQUANT) and 15.9s 4.5s (baseline) for Q4/Q5;
20.4s3.6s (iQUANT) and 29.3s 9.0s (baseline) for Q6/Q7.
The study result indicates that, on most tasks, iQUANT leads to
higher task accuracy than the baseline design. The only exception
happens on the factor selection task for a sector of stocks (Q4/Q5).
It is found that in the stock data used for these two questions, the
factor having the highest positive/negative contribution is quite sep-
arated from all the other factors. Hence, only the top-1 factor is used
as the correct answer, and in both designs, subjects could easily
identify this factor (a 100% accuracy for iQUANT). For similarly
easy tasks (Q1/Q2 and Q6/Q7), though the baseline design in most
case helps to identify one (but only one) top factor, the accuracy
of iQUANT is signiﬁcantly higher because subjects could quickly
discover more top factors in comparison to the baseline design. For
the hard task of selecting factors by stability (Q3), the advantage
of iQUANT in accuracy becomes the highest. Meanwhile, on com-
pletion time, iQUANT is favored only in the hard task of Q3, for
which the iQUANT design can better support temporal comparison
and analytics of factor contribution. For the other tasks, the com-
pletion time is similar in both iQUANT and baseline design.
6.3. Expert Feedback
In the user experiment, experts also provided valuable feedback
about several aspects of iQUANT .
Figure 4: User experiment results: (a) the number of correct answers pro-
vided by users in two visualization designs; (b) the task completion time.
On positive aspects, some experts stressed that iQUANT pre-
sented an effective way to visually compare salient factors among
different sectors of the market. In practice, the factor constituent
and dynamics are truly different across sectors, which is of great
importance to factor investing. As supported by the study result,
experts also found iQUANT to be useful in analyzing the tempo-
ral dimension of factors, as well as the relationship between factors
and stocks, which are exactly our design goal. Overall, subjects
reported the iQUANT interface to be user-friendly, as our design
was similar to their familiar and popular tools. Some experts even
commented that our design could be part of standard stock market
analysis tools (e.g., the work from Bloomberg [SB13]).
On the other hand, it was suggested that the interface could incor-
porate more statistical information according to the industry stan-
dard (e.g., the change of stock holdings in the backtesting view).
The V oronoi map for top-5 factors could be reduced to only show
the top-3 or less, in order to better reveal the most salient signal for
the stock market. More detailed visual encoding could be applied to
distinguish the factors of the same type, which are now depicted in
the same color. Notably, we thought the complexity of the interface
could raise learning issues. During the study, most subjects could
be well prepared after a 10-minute training session, as indicated by
the high task accuracy in applying iQUANT.
7. Case Study
7.1. Selection of Investment Time
We ﬁrst invited a fund manager to select the best investment time
for individual stock with iQUANT. He looked at the year of 2016.2-
2017.1 when the market index rose by 15.7%. From a list of candi-
dates, the manager examined each stock until a feasible investment
time for excess return is identiﬁed.
The manager reported stock in the Computer sector (code:
002351.SZ) for which the composite index of the whole sector
rose by 2.5%. In his analysis, the Lasso model was selected. As
shown in Figure 5(a1), the initial factor view displays a summary
of important factors recommended by the Lasso model. In the fac-
tor list view (Figure 5(a2)), the manager identiﬁed several useful
factors having large contribution to the stock return. He hovered
these factors one by one to examine their performance in the given
period. The AM factor (asset-to-market ratio) was chosen because
its contributions are stable in the ﬁrst six months: all negative to
the rise of stock prices. There are two months when the factor sen-
© 2021 The Author(s)
Computer Graphics Forum © 2021 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.Xuanwu Yue et al. / iQUANT: Interactive Quantitative Investment Using Sparse Regression Factors
(b1)(a1)
(b2)(a2)
(b3)(a3)
(b4)(a4)
Figure 5: The selection of investment time during 2016.2-2017.1 on 002351.SZ by: (a) a single-factor model ( AM); (b) a two-factor model ( AM+volumed ).
The manager switched from a single-factor model to a two-factor model to optimize his investment strategy.
sitivity is high, as indicated by opaque colors. By this one-factor
model, the investment return (red curve in Figure 5(a3)) surpasses
the stock price change (blue curve) by 26.5% at the end of the pe-
riod. A maximal return of 11% can also be forecast for the next
three months, as shown by the grey dotted curve in the backtest-
ing view of Figure 5(a4). Notably, the manager suggested applying
the model from June when the AM factor has been stable for four
months and enjoys a high sensitivity in the latest month (May). In
case this strategy was adopted, an excess return of 39.1% could be
earned in June when the overall market only rose by 1.6%.
To optimize the investment for the whole year, the manager ex-
plored other factors that can characterize the price change in the
second half of the year. He found that the volumed factor was com-
plementary to AM, as the volumed factor contributed to the model
mainly from July (Figure 5(b1)). By applying a AM+volumed two-
factor model, a return of 81.8% can be obtained by the end of
the period, which is 14.5% more than the one-factor model (Fig-
ure 5(b3)). Notably, the predicted return for the next three months
increases to 40.9% with the new model (Figure 5(b4)).
7.2. Selection of Stock Portfolio
In the second scenario, we invited the fund manager to select a port-
folio of stocks to invest from an initial stock pool in a given time
period. The sector-based division was adopted. The manager ana-
lyzed every candidate sector, and combined the selected stocks in
each sector into a ﬁnal portfolio for investment. The year of 2015
was considered when the market experienced a spike with the max-
imal index climbing as high as 60% in the ﬁrst six months. The
yearly growth was 9.4% after the downturn in the second half of
the year. It is thus an appropriate scenario to test whether our tool
can improve factor investing even in rapidly changing markets.
The manager ﬁrst studied the Chemical sector which had a simi-
lar trend to the market in 2015. The factor view in Figure 2(b) visu-
alizes an initial collection of factors using the ELNetApp model. It
can be seen in the factor view that many factors are quite stable over
time. Different from the study on individual stocks, for portfolio
construction, the manager would like to select both valuable factors
and a set of stocks whose selected factors behave in a similarly sta-
ble and effective way. Our tool provides support with an interactive
selection process. Users can click on each important factor in thefactor list (Figure 2(d)) and scroll in the stock view (Figure 2(c)) to
identify candidate stocks. By this process, the manager found factor
lagretn , which had a moderate overall contribution to stock returns
of the sector (Figure 2(d)) and the contribution was stable on sev-
eral individual stocks. As shown in Figure 6(a), the selected stocks
share similar patterns on lagretn . When the stock price started to
rise again from September (notice red/green bars in Figure 2(c)),
the contribution of lagretn reversed to negative and stayed for few
months, as shown by the connecting lines in Figure 6(a). It is found
in Figure 6(b) that ﬁve stocks (red lines) sharing this pattern on la-
gretn receive excess returns above the sector average (blue line).
The prediction performance in Figure 6(c) (grey dotted line) also
surpasses the market average (blue dotted line).
The manager proceeded to interactively examine all the ﬁve se-
lected stocks. In the factor list view, he checked again all the can-
didate factors and found the factor stddvol, which had a favorable
pattern as the factor lagretn on all the selected stocks. After apply-
ing the two factors together (Figure 2(d)), the stock returns were
re-computed and updated in Figure 2(e). One stock appeared to re-
ceive less return after adding the second factor, while all the other
four stocks remained superior to the sector average. In the back-
testing view (Figure 2(f)), the ﬁnal portfolio of two factors and four
stocks (red lines) turned out to be better than the single-factor port-
folio (grey lines) in both the backtest performance in 2015 (solid
lines) and an outlook in the ﬁrst three months of 2016 (dotted lines).
In another study, we asked the manager to work in the Household
Appliances sector in the same year of 2015. By repeating a similar
process, he was able to build a two-factor model of size+retnmax .
Three stocks having stable contributions were selected. The port-
folio returns in both 2015 and 2016 (outlook) are better than the
market average. We omit screenshots due to the space limit.
By comparing the visual analysis result in the above two sec-
tors, it is noticed that the Appliance sector is almost exclusively
inﬂuenced by the transaction factors, while the Chemical sector is
inﬂuenced by transaction factors and other types of factors such as
momentum, value, and growth (Figure 2(d)). We hypothesize that
because of their relationship, the Chemical sector is not only af-
fected by transactions in the stock market but also linked to the
price of crude oil, which is independently traded.
© 2021 The Author(s)
Computer Graphics Forum © 2021 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.Xuanwu Yue et al. / iQUANT: Interactive Quantitative Investment Using Sparse Regression Factors
(a) (b)
(d)(c)(d)
Figure 6: Portfolio construction from the Chemical sector using the single factor ( lagretn ) in 2015: (a) lagretn factor contributed similarly to theses three
stocks; (b) selected high return stocks for portfolio; (c) backtesting results from the portfolio; (d) a detailed illustration of the Voronoi-based glyph.
8. Discussion
The sparse regression model and its ﬂexibility. In our system,
users routinely start from an initial set of factors recommended
by the build-in sparse regression model, which potentially limits
the ﬂexibility of factor investing by iQUANT . This issue is alle-
viated from three directions: in the factor list view (Figure 2(d)),
users can manually select any set of factors as the starting point of
analysis; the sparsity parameter of the regression model ( l) can be
tuned in the backend to offer more or less initial factors; ﬁnally, the
iQUANT system is fully compatible with any other sparse models
or a combination of feature selection and prediction models.
The joint human-model approach and its advantage. We have
mentioned in previous sections, the model-only approach in fac-
tor selection suffers from the interpretability issue. Traders need to
understand the factor before applied in practice. Also, a human is
better in a heuristic search of the best combination within the vast
factor space. More importantly, in the ﬁnancial domain, there is no
model that works in the long term. It will be critical to have human
stand by models, and would be better to early adjust accordingly.
The visual design and its learning curve. Notice that stock
traders may not have a strong background in visualization. Thus,
we tried to strike a balance between the intuitiveness and expres-
siveness of visualization. On one hand, classical designs such as bar
charts and line charts are employed in iQUANT , due to their intu-
itiveness and users’ familiarity. On the other hand, our designs are
tailored to the target users. For example in the factor view, green/red
are used to indicate the decline/rise of stock prices, according to the
convention of our target market. The effectiveness of iQUANT de-
sign is conﬁrmed by the user study result and expert feedback. Most
subjects found iQUANT easy to learn and understand.
The user study and its design choices. We evaluated iQUANT
through a formal user study focusing on the performance of fac-
tor/stock selection. The study would have accounted for more
stages of iQUANT by looking at the ﬁnal stock returns, or the ac-
curacy in predicting. We stayed in the scope of evaluating factors
for two reasons. First, the stock return by an interactive factor in-
vesting system is determined in complex interactions among fac-
tor/stock selection, predictive model, and trading strategy. A higher
stock return in the study may or may not be directly correlated with
a better factor selection design. Second, there is currently no com-mercial tool that supports end-to-end interactive factor investing.
We compare iQUANT with a baseline design, which is not natively
integrated with prediction models and trading strategies.
The deployment of iQUANT and its extensibility. The invest-
ment industry is highly closed as the winning secret can be too
valuable to disclose. This closedness prohibits a more practical ap-
proach to directly optimize deployed tools. Instead, we developed a
homegrown interactive factor investing pipeline and an end-to-end
system. Because of the complexity of quantitative investment, we
mainly focus on improving the factor selection in the pipeline. We
demonstrated the effectiveness of iQUANT by using the 20-year
real stock market data. However, our system can also be deployed
to take in real-time data. As a next step, we plan to customize and
integrate iQUANT into the production system of our industrial col-
laborators, in the hope of making real impacts on the industry.
9. Conclusion
This paper presents iQUANT, a visual analytics system that seam-
lessly integrates algorithmic and user-steered feature selection
methods for interactive factor investing. On the analytics side, we
explore the use of sparse regression models that jointly optimizing
factor selection and stock prediction processes. On the visualiza-
tion side, we propose multiple coordinated visual designs to com-
prehensively illustrate importance metrics of each factor, including
its positive/negative contribution to models, the factor stability and
sensitivity. On top of the prediction model and visualization design,
iQUANT develops an interactive framework that encloses factor
reﬁnement and portfolio construction in the same visual analytics
loop. With iQUANT , traders can optimize their investment strat-
egy and evaluate them in industry-standard backtesting. We demon-
strate the value of iQUANT through one formal user study and two
case studies, using a real stock market dataset recording the stock
data in the past 30 years. On the selection of investment time and
stock portfolio, our domain experts achieved excess returns from
both individual stock and sector-based portfolios.
Acknowledgment
We thank the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments
and Prof. Lei Shi for his constructive suggestions on this project.
This work is partially supported by a research collaboration grant
from Microsoft Research Asia.
© 2021 The Author(s)
Computer Graphics Forum © 2021 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.Xuanwu Yue et al. / iQUANT: Interactive Quantitative Investment Using Sparse Regression Factors
References
[Asn97] A SNESS C. S.: The interaction of value and momentum strate-
gies. Financial Analysts Journal 53 , 2 (1997), 29–36. doi:10.2469/
faj.v53.n2.2069 . 3
[BS16] B ANG H., S ELVA D.: ifeed: Interactive feature extraction
for engineering design. In ASME 2016 International Design En-
gineering Technical Conferences and Computers and Information
in Engineering Conference (2016), American Society of Mechani-
cal Engineers, pp. V007T06A037–V007T06A037. doi:10.1115/
DETC2016-60077 . 2
[BW08] B YRON L., W ATTENBERG M.: Stacked graphs - geometry &
aesthetics. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
14, 6 (2008), 1245–1252. doi:10.1109/TVCG.2008.166 . 6
[CG20] C OQUERET G., G UIDA T.:Machine Learning for Factor Invest-
ing: R Version . CRC Press, 2020. 3
[CGK07] C HANG R., G HONIEM M., K OSARA R., R IBARSKY W.,
YANG J., S UMA E., Z IEMKIEWICZ C., K ERN D., S UDJIANTO A.:
Wirevis: Visualization of categorical, time-varying data from ﬁnancial
transactions. In 2007 IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and
Technology (Oct 2007), pp. 155–162. doi:10.1109/VAST.2007.
4389009 . 2
[CHL03] C SALLNER C., H ANDTE M., L EHMANN O., , S TASKO J.:
Fundexplorer: Supporting the diversiﬁcation of mutual fund portfolios
using context treemaps. In IEEE Symposium on Information Visualiza-
tion 2003 (Oct 2003), pp. 203–208. doi:10.1109/INFVIS.2003.
1249027 . 2
[CLL16] C HENG K., L IJ., L IUH.: Featureminer: A tool for interac-
tive feature selection. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM International
on Conference on Information and Knowledge Management (New York,
NY , USA, 2016), CIKM ’16, ACM, pp. 2445–2448. doi:10.1145/
2983323.2983329 . 2
[DBBS08] D AOH. T., B AZINET A. L., B ERTHIER R., S HNEIDERMAN
B.: Nasdaq velocity and forces: An interactive visualization of activity
and change. Journal of Universal Computer Science 14 , 9 (2008), 1391–
1410. doi:10.3217/jucs-014-09-1391 . 2
[DML14] D UMAS M., M CGUFFIN M. J., L EMIEUX V. L.:
Financevis.net-a visual survey of ﬁnancial data visualizations. In
IEEE Conference on information Visualization (2014), vol. 2. 2
[DS97] D ECHOW P. M., S LOAN R. G.: Returns to contrarian investment
strategies: Tests of naive expectations hypotheses. Journal of Financial
Economics 43 , 1 (1997), 3–27. 3
[DvVH19] D INGEN D., VAN’TVEER M., H OUTHUIZEN P., M E-
STROM E. H. J., K ORSTEN E. H., B OUWMAN A. R., VAN WIJKJ.:
Regressionexplorer: Interactive exploration of logistic regression models
with subgroup analysis. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Com-
puter Graphics 25 , 1 (2019), 246–255. doi:10.1109/TVCG.2018.
2865043 . 2
[EASD19] E L-ASSADY M., S PERRLE F., D EUSSEN O., K EIM D.,
COLLINS C.: Visual analytics for topic model optimization based on
user-steerable speculative execution. IEEE Transactions on Visualiza-
tion and Computer Graphics 25 , 1 (2019), 374–384. doi:10.1109/
TVCG.2018.2864769 . 2
[FF92] F AMA E. F., F RENCH K. R.: The cross-section of expected
stock returns. The Journal of Finance 47 , 2 (1992), 427–465. doi:
10.1111/j.1540-6261.1992.tb04398.x . 1, 3, 5
[FF04] F AMA E. F., F RENCH K. R.: The capital asset pricing model:
Theory and evidence. Journal of Economic Perspectives 18 , 3 (2004),
25–46. doi:10.1257/0895330042162430 . 1
[GE03] G UYON I., E LISSEEFF A.: An introduction to variable and fea-
ture selection. The Journal of Machine Learning Research 3 (2003),
1157–1182. doi:10.5555/944919.944968 . 1
[GK13] G LANTZ M., K ISSELL R.: Multi-Asset Risk Modeling: Tech-
niques for a Global Economy in an Electronic and Algorithmic Trading
Era. Academic Press, 2013. 1[HHN00] H AVRE S., H ETZLER B., N OWELL L.: Themeriver: visual-
izing theme changes over time. In Proceedings of IEEE Symposium
on Information Visualization 2000. (Oct 2000), pp. 115–123. doi:
10.1109/INFVIS.2000.885098 . 7
[JJ09] J OHANSSON S., J OHANSSON J.: Interactive dimensionality re-
duction through user-deﬁned combinations of quality metrics. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 15 , 6 (2009),
993–1000. doi:10.1109/TVCG.2009.153 . 2
[JS04] J INWOOK SEO, SHNEIDERMAN B.: A rank-by-feature frame-
work for unsupervised multidimensional data exploration using low di-
mensional projections. In IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization
(Oct 2004), pp. 65–72. doi:10.1109/INFVIS.2004.3 . 2
[KCA16] K OS., C HOI., A FZAL S., Y AUC., C HAE J., M ALIK A.,
BECK K., J ANG Y., R IBARSKY W., E BERT D. S.: A survey on visual
analysis approaches for ﬁnancial data. Computer Graphics Forum 35 , 3
(2016), 599–617. doi:10.1111/cgf.12931 . 2
[KNS06] K EIMD. A., N IETZSCHMANN T., S CHELWIES N., S CHNEI -
DEWIND J., S CHRECK T., Z IEGLER H.: A spectral visualiza-
tion system for analyzing ﬁnancial time series data. In Pro-
ceedings of the Eighth Joint Eurographics / IEEE VGTC Confer-
ence on Visualization (Aire-la-Ville, Switzerland, Switzerland, 2006),
Eurographics Association, pp. 195–202. URL: http://dx.
doi.org/10.2312/VisSym/EuroVis06/195-202 ,doi:10.
2312/VisSym/EuroVis06/195-202 . 2
[KPB14] K RAUSE J., P ERER A., B ERTINI E.: Infuse: Interactive fea-
ture selection for predictive modeling of high dimensional data. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 20 , 12 (2014),
1614–1623. doi:10.1109/TVCG.2014.2346482 . 2
[KPN16] K RAUSE J., P ERER A., N GK.: Interacting with predictions:
Visual inspection of black-box machine learning models. In Proceedings
of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(New York, NY , USA, 2016), ACM, pp. 5686–5697. doi:10.1145/
2858036.2858529 . 2
[LCW17] L IJ., C HENG K., W ANG S., M ORSTATTER F., T REVINO
R. P., T ANG J., L IUH.: Feature selection: A data perspective.
ACM Computing Surveys 50 , 6 (2017), 94:1–94:45. doi:10.1145/
3136625 . 2
[Lin65] L INTNER J.: The valuation of risk assets and the selection of
risky investments in stock portfolios and capital budgets. The Review of
Economics and Statistics 47 , 1 (1965), 13–37. URL: http://www.
jstor.org/stable/1924119 . 3
[LWW20] L INY., W ONG K., W ANG Y., Z HANG R., D ONG B., Q UH.,
ZHENG Q.: Taxthemis: Interactive mining and exploration of suspicious
tax evasion groups. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics (2020). 2
[LXL18] L IUS., X IAO J., L IUJ., W ANG X., W UJ., Z HUJ.: Vi-
sual diagnosis of tree boosting methods. IEEE Transactions on Vi-
sualization and Computer Graphics 24 , 1 (2018), 163–173. doi:
10.1109/TVCG.2017.2744378 . 2
[MAHG16] M CCOMBE M., A NGA., H OGAN K., G ELFAND Y.:The
rise of factor investing . BlackRock, 2016. 1
[MBD11] M AY T., B ANNACH A., D AVEY J., R UPPERT T.,
KOHLHAMMER J.: Guiding feature subset selection with an inter-
active visualization. In Proceedings of 2011 IEEE Conference on Visual
Analytics Science and Technology (VAST) (Oct 2011), pp. 111–120.
doi:10.1109/VAST.2011.6102448 . 2
[MQB19] M ING Y., Q UH., B ERTINI E.: Rulematrix: visualizing and
understanding classiﬁers with rules. IEEE Transactions on Visualiza-
tion and Computer Graphics 25 , 1 (2019), 342–352. doi:10.1109/
TVCG.2018.2864812 . 2
[NB04] N ESBITT K. V., B ARRASS S.: Finding trading patterns in stock
market data. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 24 , 5 (2004),
45–55. doi:10.1109/MCG.2004.28 . 2
[PKWQ20] P URIA., K UB. K., W ANG Y., Q UH.: Rankbooster: Visual
© 2021 The Author(s)
Computer Graphics Forum © 2021 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.Xuanwu Yue et al. / iQUANT: Interactive Quantitative Investment Using Sparse Regression Factors
analysis of ranking predictions. In Proceedings of EuroVis 2020 (short
paper) (2020), pp. 175–179. 2
[PLdSSV98] P ORTA R. L., L OPEZ -DESILANES F., S HLEIFER A.,
VISHNY R. W.: Law and ﬁnance. Journal of Political Economy 106 ,
6 (1998), 1113–1155. doi:10.1086/250042 . 3
[RKD16] R ODRIGUEZ J., K ACZMAREK P., D EPEW D.: Visualizing ﬁ-
nancial data . Wiley Online Library, 2016. 2
[RSE09] R UDOLPH S., S AVIKHIN A., E BERT D. S.: Finvis: Applied vi-
sual analytics for personal ﬁnancial planning. In 2009 IEEE Symposium
on Visual Analytics Science and Technology (Oct 2009), pp. 195–202.
doi:10.1109/VAST.2009.5333920 . 2
[SB13] S ORENSON E., B RATH R.: Financial visualization case study:
Correlating ﬁnancial timeseries and discrete events to support investment
decisions. In 17th International Conference on Information Visualisation
(2013), pp. 232–238. doi:10.1109/IV.2013.31 . 2, 8
[SBTK08] S CHRECK T., B ERNARD J., T EKUSOVA T., K OHLHAMMER
J.: Visual cluster analysis of trajectory data with interactive koho-
nen maps. In 2008 IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science
and Technology (Oct 2008), pp. 3–10. doi:10.1109/VAST.2008.
4677350 . 2
[Sha64] S HARPE W. F.: Capital asset prices: A theory of market equi-
librium under conditions of risk. The Journal of Finance 19 , 3 (1964),
425–442. URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2977928 . 3
[Šim03] Š IMUNI ´CK.: Visualization of stock market charts. In The 11th
International Conference in Central Europe on Computer Graphics, Vi-
sualization and Computer Vision (2003), vol. 3, pp. 129–132. 2
[SLFE11] S AVIKHIN A., L AMH. C., F ISHER B., E BERT D. S.: An
experimental study of ﬁnancial portfolio selection with visual analytics
for decision support. In 44th Hawaii International Conference on System
Sciences (2011), pp. 1–10. doi:10.1109/HICSS.2011.54 . 2
[STKF07] S CHRECK T., T EKUŠOVÁ T., K OHLHAMMER J., F ELLNER
D.: Trajectory-based visual analysis of large ﬁnancial time series data.
ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter 9 , 2 (2007), 30–37. doi:10.
1145/1345448.1345454 . 2
[Teg99] T EGARDEN D. P.: Business information visualization. Commu-
nications of the Association for Information Systems 1 , 4 (1999), 1–38.
doi:10.17705/1CAIS.00104 . 2
[Tib96] T IBSHIRANI R.: Regression shrinkage and selection via the
lasso. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodologi-
cal) 58 , 1 (1996), 267–288. doi:10.1111/j.2517-6161.1996.
tb02080.x . 4
[TLL20] T SANG K. W., L IH., L AMF. M., M UY., W ANG Y., Q UH.:
Tradao: A visual analytics system for trading algorithm optimization.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.11319 (2020). 2
[TS08] T EKUSOVA T., S CHRECK T.: Visualizing time-dependent data
in multivariate hierarchic plots - design and evaluation of an economic
application. In 2008 12th International Conference Information Visuali-
sation (July 2008), pp. 143–150. doi:10.1109/IV.2008.51 . 2
[Tsi18] White paper for the list of quantitative factors in a major stock
market, 2018. URL: http://mscf.pbcsf.tsinghua.edu.cn/
uploadfile/2018/0316/20180316025702935.pdf . 1, 5
[UGH09] U SAIM. G., G ODDARD M. E., H AYES B. J.: Lasso with
cross-validation for genomic selection. Genetics Research 91 , 6 (2009),
427–436. doi:10.1017/S0016672309990334 . 4
[VV99] V ANWIJKJ. J., V ANSELOW E. R.: Cluster and calendar based
visualization of time series data. In Proceedings 1999 IEEE Symposium
on Information Visualization (InfoVis’99) (Oct 1999), pp. 4–9. doi:
10.1109/INFVIS.1999.801851 . 2
[YBL19] Y UEX., B AIJ., L IUQ., T ANG Y., P URIA., L IK., Q UH.:
sportfolio: Stratiﬁed visual analysis of stock portfolios. IEEE Transac-
tions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 26 , 1 (2019), 601–610.
2[YSZ19] Y UEX., S HUX., Z HUX., D UX., Y UZ., P APADOPOULOS
D., L IUS.: Bitextract: Interactive visualization for extracting bitcoin
exchange intelligence. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Com-
puter Graphics 25 , 1 (2019), 162–171. doi:10.1109/TVCG.2018.
2864814 . 2
[ZH05] Z OUH., H ASTIE T.: Regularization and variable selection
via the elastic net. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B
(Statistical Methodology) 67 , 2 (2005), 301–320. doi:10.1111/j.
1467-9868.2005.00503.x . 4
[ZJGK10] Z IEGLER H., J ENNY M., G RUSE T., K EIM D. A.: Visual
market sector analysis for ﬁnancial time series data. In 2010 IEEE Sym-
posium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology (Oct 2010), pp. 83–
90.doi:10.1109/VAST.2010.5652530 . 2
[ZNK07] Z IEGLER H., N IETZSCHMANN T., K EIM D. A.: Relevance
driven visualization of ﬁnancial performance measures. In Eurograph-
ics/IEEE TCVG Symposium on Visualization (2007), pp. 19–26. doi:
10.2312/VisSym/EuroVis07/019-026 . 2
[ZWLC19] Z HAO X., W UY., L EED. L., C UIW.: iforest: Interpreting
random forests via visual analytics. IEEE Transactions on Visualiza-
tion and Computer Graphics 25 , 1 (2019), 407–416. doi:10.1109/
TVCG.2018.2864475 . 2
© 2021 The Author(s)
Computer Graphics Forum © 2021 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.