Quantum Prisoner's Dilemma and High Frequency
Trading on the Quantum Cloud
Faisal Shah Khan∗1and Ning Bao†2
1Dark Star Quantum Lab, 211 Attain St, Fuquay-Varina, NC 27526
2Computational Science Initiative, Brookhaven National Lab, Upton,
NY, 11973
April 13, 2021
Abstract
High-frequency trading (HFT) oers an excellent user case and a
potential killer application of the commercially available, rst genera-
tion quasi-quantum communication and computation technologies. To
this end, we oer here a simple but complete game-theoretic model
of HFT as the famous two player game, Prisoner's Dilemma. We ex-
plore the implementation of HFT as a game on the (quasi) quantum
cloud using the Eisert, Wilkens, and Lewenstein quantum mediated
communication protocol, and how this implementation can increase
transaction speed and improve the lot of the players in HFT. Using
cooperative game-theoretic reasoning, we also note that in the near
future when the internet is properly quantum, players will be able to
achieve Pareto-optimality in HFT as an instance of reinforced learning.
1 Introduction
Non-cooperative game theory is the art of strategic interaction between in-
dividuals competing for joint stakes over which they entertain diering pref-
erences. Game-theoretic reasoning can formally be traced back the Ancient
Chinese General Sun Tzu (circa 500 BCE) and the ancient Indian minister,
Chanakya (circa 300 BCE).
Mathematical formalization of non-cooperative game theory in the 20th
century goes back to the work of von Neumann and Nash. The publication
the seminal work of von Neumann and Morgenstern titled Theory of Games
and Economic Behavior [1] brought focus upon game theory as the right
∗Corresponding Author: quantumsheikh@gmail.com
†ningbao75@gmail.com
1arXiv:2104.04663v1  [quant-ph]  10 Apr 2021Figure 1: Prisoner's Dilemma.
mathematical language to analyze economic behavior and strategic decision
making. The practical usefulness of the subject was made apparent by
the awarding of several Noble prizes in Economics to developers of game-
theoretic reasoning, including Nash [2], Harsanyi [3], Selten [4], Aumann
[5], and Smith [6] for work in applications of game-theoretic reasoning to
economics, political stratagem, and evolutionary biology. With the ongoing
Covid-19 pandemic, game theoretic reasoning has also been used to shed
light on best practices in developing optimal public health policy [7].
With the recent advent of commercially viable quantum computation
and communication technologies, the conuence of ideas from game theory
and quantum information processing has gained strong interest. This inter-
est has given birth to the subject known as quantum game theory (section
3), where the impact of quantum information technology on game-theoretic
reasoning is studied. An area where quantum game theory may be of par-
ticular interest is the area of high-frequency trading. Here, many players
participate in iterated buy/sell interactions at a very high rate, capitalizing
on small market uctuations in either duration, intensity, or both to gain
revenue. Because the timing of such interactions is critical to the success of
high-frequency rms compared to rms that trade at slower rates, new tools
that can improve the degree of synchronicity between the rms and which
can provide provably-secure communication, are of great interest.
2 Prisoner's Dilemma - A Game Theory Primer
Consider the non-cooperative game called Prisoner's Dilemma , a 2-player
non-cooperative game in which each of the two players (prisoners) who com-
mitted a crime together are given the opportunity to reduce their time served
in prison by helping authorities implicate the other player for the crime.
This game is presented in tabular form in Figure 1 where the outcomes of
the game are given as ordered pairs of numbers. The rst number in each
outcome is the payo to Player I in the form of the number of years com-
muted from his sentence, and the second number is the payo to Player
II.
The players have disparate preferences over the outcomes of the game,
2which are captured below using the symbol to denote the notion of \pre-
ferred over":
Player I : (5 ;0)(3;3)(1;1)(0;5)
Player II : (0 ;5)(3;3)(1;1)(5;0):(1)
It is assumed that the players are rational , that is, each player will play
the game in way that is consistent with his preferences. The game is played
by employing strategies to optimize the payos. The two strategies available
to both players are to either cooperate with the authorities to implicate the
other player ( C), or to defect from oer to help the authorities ( D). The
question is: what is the outcome of the game (or the play of the game)?
The answer is provided in the form of Nash equilibrium , a prole of
strategies, one per player, in which no player has motivation to deviate from
his strategic choice. In other words, Nash equilibrium is a strategy prole
in which each player's strategy is a best reply (with respect to the players'
preferences) to all others. Not all games have a Nash equilibrium.
For Prisoners' Dilemma, Figure 2 shows that the Nash equilibrium is
the strategy prole ( D;D). This is the dilemma; for clearly, each player
will be better o playing the strategy C, but this is not a best reply to
the strategic choice of Cby the other player. The strategy prole ( C;C)
(and its corresponding outcome) is Pareto-optimal , that is, its corresponding
outcome is such that moving away from it to make one player better o will
necessarily make another player worse o. Note that the strategy proles
(C;D) and ( D;C) are also Pareto-optimal; however, no player wishes to
complete her full sentence while her partner in crime walks free (as evidenced
by the preference relations in expression (1)).
2.1 Mixed Strategies and Mediated Communication
When Nash equilibrium is not present in a game, or if it is sub-optimal,
game-theorists suggest that players employ randomization over the outcomes
as a mechanism for introducing or improving Nash equilibrium. To this
end, players are allowed to independently randomize over their respective
strategies, a notion referred to as mixed strategies , to produce probability
distributions over the outcomes. The resulting mixed game will have at least
one Nash equilibrium outcome (John Nash's Nobel prize winning result [2]).
However, this mixed strategy Nash equilibrium need not be better paying
than the one available in the original game, and it need not be Pareto-
optimal. Indeed, this holds true for Prisoner's Dilemma.
Further renement of the Nash equilibrium may be possible if a referee is
inducted into the game at negligible cost. This proper extension of a game is
know as the game with mediated communication . In such games, the referee
creates a probability distribution over the outcomes of the game that the
players could not using mixed strategies. The referee then tells each player
3Figure 2: Nash equilibrium versus Pareto-optimal outcomes in Prisoner's
Dilemma.
in condence which strategy he should employ. Each player than checks the
viability of the referee's advice with respect to his preferences and the 50-50
chance of the other player agreeing to the advice given to him by the referee.
If the viability checks out, the player agrees with the referee. When both
players agree to the referees advice, the resulting Nash equilibrium is known
as a correlated equilibrium .
Even further renements of Nash equilibrium are conceivable by simply
extending the domain of the game from Euclidean space to more exotic
(and non-trivial) mathematical spaces such as Hilbert space and Banach
space. The challenge then becomes how to keep the mathematical extensions
grounded in physical reality. For the case of games extended to complex
projective Hilbert space, the physical context is quantum mechanics. The
result of this extension is the theory of \quantum games".
3 Quantum Games
Foreseeing the rise of quantum technologies like quantum computers and
quantum communication devices and protocols, Meyer oered the rst game-
theoretic model of quantum algorithms. In his seminal work [8] on the
topic, he showed that in a simple penny ipping game, the player with
access to quantum physical operations (or \quantum strategies") acting on
the penny always won the game. His work was followed by Eisert et al.'s
work [9] where the authors showed how to properly extend a game into
the quantum realm with quantum mediated communication . These authors
presented a two qubit (two player) quantum circuit that implemented the
quantum communication protocol for Prisoner's Dilemma. This protocol is
known as the EWL protocol and appears in gure 3.
The EWL protocol is a quantum circuit that takes in as input the two-
4Figure 3: The quantum circuit implementation of the EWL quantum game
protocol. The referee consists of two quantum logic gates, J, which entangles
the two qubits, and its inverse, Jy. In the middle of these two operations are
the players' independent quantum strategic choices that each of them enacts
on her qubit as unitary operations. We assume the top qubit is Player I's
and the second one is Player II's.
qubit state
j00i=0
BB@1
0
0
01
CCA; (2)
with each qubit belonging to one player. This state is acted upon by the
referee to produce a higher-order randomization in the form of a quantum
superposition followed by measurement. In particular, the referee entangles
the two qubits using a general entangling operator
J() = cos
2I
I+isin
2x
x (3)
whereIis the 22 identity operator, xis the Pauli-spin ip operator, and
0
2. When= 0, the protocol reproduces the original \classical"
game.
For=
2, the game exhibits maximal entanglement between the qubits
and the remarkable features discussed below. For this value of ,
J=0
BBB@1p
20 0ip
2
01p
2ip
20
0ip
21p
20
ip
20 01p
21
CCCA: (4)
5Therefore,
Jj00i=1p
2(j00i+ij11i) =0
BBB@1p
2
0
0
ip
21
CCCA: (5)
The referee forwards the state in (5) to the players as her advice upon which
the players can act with their quantum strategies. Finally, the referee disen-
tangles the resulting two qubit state and makes a measurement, producing
a probability distribution over the outcomes of the game (the observable
states) from which expected payos to the players can be computed. Since
the probability distribution was created using higher-order randomization by
quantum superpositioning, the correlations it creates between the outcomes
of the game after measurement are stronger than those possible classically
[10].
3.1 (Almost) Solving the Dilemma
The remarkable implication of the EWL protocol for Prisoner's Dilemma is
that under the right subset of quantum strategies, this quantum extension
of the game eliminates the dilemma and the resulting Nash equilibrium
is Pareto-optimal! The quantum strategies that allow this are the two-
parameter subset of the set of one qubit gates:
A:=eicos sin
 sin e icos
: 0
2;0
2
: (6)
However, when the full set of quantum strategies is made available to
the players [11], that is,
B:=eicos eisin
 e isin e icos
: 0
2; ; ;
;(7)
the dilemma reappears in the quantum version of the game and the Nash
equilibrium solution is the same as of the classical game. This is because a
best reply to a quantum strategy from set Ais a quantum strategy from set
B. But now, the other player also responds with a quantum strategy from
setB, thus nullifying the quantum solution to the dilemma.
Emulating mixed strategies, a further natural quantum extension is pos-
sible by allowing players to randomize over their quantum strategies, giving
rise to the notion of mixed quantum strategies . Eisert et al. showed that
while the players cannot solve the dilemma by resorting to mixed quantum
strategies in Prisoner's Dilemma, they can come close to it. By using mixed
quantum strategies, the players can aect a Nash equilibrium in which the
payo is (2 :5;2:5). This solution is closer to the Pareto-optimal outcome
(3;3) than the sub-optimal outcome (1 ;1). Mixed strategies have a realistic
6physical interpretation as the result of quantum strategies being transmitted
over a noisy communication channel.
Motivated by the results of the seminal works of Meyer and Eisert et al.,
quantum game theory has become a major area of research since the seminal
papers of Meyer and Eisert et al. A relatively recent and comprehensive
review of the subject can be found in [12].
4 The Dilemma in High Frequency Trading
High-frequency trading (HFT) is dened by Gomber et al. in [13] as follows.
HFT relates to the implementation of proprietary trading strate-
gies by technologically advanced market participants. ... HFT
enable market participants to dramatically speed up the recep-
tion of market data, internal calculation procedures, order sub-
mission and reception of execution conrmations.
Our aim here is to show that quantum computing via the cloud can be used
to implement HFT as a quantum game. For this, rst note that HFT is an
instance of Prisoner's Dilemma where Player I and Player II represent the
trading mindset of a market, buying and selling of commodities using the
two strategies Buy orSell. Assuming that in markets there is a preference
toward being part of a mass-buy versus a mass-sell, we set the following pref-
erences for the players over the four possible strategy proles as reasonably
reecting the mood of any market,
Player I : (Sell ;Buy)(Buy;Buy)(Sell;Sell)(Buy;Sell)
Player II : (Buy ;Sell)(Buy;Buy)(Sell;Sell)(Sell;Buy);(8)
with a player most preferring to sell on his terms versus buying on the other
payers terms.
These preferences are identical to those in Prisoners' Dilemma when the
numerical payo values from expression (1) are faithfully substituted into
expression (8). Figure 4 shows HFT as an instance of Prisoners' Dilemma.
Note that the dilemma in HFT is that the game will reach the sub-optimal
Nash equilibrium (Sell ;Sell) = (1;1), which is a highly detrimental outcome
for markets.
4.1 HFT on the Quantum Cloud
Today, the internet is quasi-quantum, meaning that users can access third
party, rst generation quantum processors via the cloud (the quantum cloud),
which can oer transnational speed up. More importantly, the quasi-quantum
internet can oer enhanced payos in the transaction when implemented us-
ing the EWL protocol for Prisoner's Dilemma.
7Figure 4: High-frequency trading as an instance of Prisoners' Dilemma, as
per the preferences described in expression (8).
Due to the quasi-quantum nature of the internet, only noisy quantum
communications are possible to date. Therefore, the referee will likely only
be able to create limited entanglement between the qubits. This means that
HFT on the quantum cloud will improve the lot of the players to only a near
Pareto-optimal Nash equilibrium, the upper-limit of which for the moment
is the appropriate equivalent of the notional (2 :5;2:5) payo. Nonetheless,
even these small improvement in the payos will be worthwhile given the
large amounts of money being traded.
In the near future, the internet will be fully quantum, and improved -
delity of the transmission of the quantum information will mean that quan-
tum entanglement between the players' qubits will be maintained for longer
duration. This will allow the realization of the upper limit of the mixed
quantum strategy Nash equilibrium, (2 :5;2:5).
4.2 Optimality and cooperation in HFT on the quantum
cloud
From a non-cooperative game theory perspective, the pure quantum strat-
egy Nash equilibrium that resolves the dilemma and produces the Pareto-
optimal Nash equilibrium (3 ;3) is fundamentally irrational. This is due to
the fact that the best reply to any strategy from the set Ain (6) is a strategy
from the set Bin (7). This would then seem to invalidate the whole idea of
implementing HFT on the quantum internet of the near future for optimal
benets. However, there is an appropriate game-theoretic solution for this
issue found in the the cooperative theory of games. As Aumann points out
in [5]:
We use the term cooperative to describe any possible outcome
of a game, as long as no player can guarantee a better out-
come for himself. It is important to emphasize that in general, a
cooperative out-come is not in equilibrium; it's the result of an
agreement. For example, in the well-known \prisoner's dilemma"
game, the outcome in which neither prisoner confesses is a coop-
erative outcome; it is in neither player's best interests, though it
8is better for both than the unique equilibrium.
Hence, the solution lies in the notion of agreement contracts and the
ability to enforce them. For this, the game has to be played repeatedly
and the behavioral history of the players collected and used to develop the
contracts and the enforcement methods (incentives and disincentives). It
is noteworthy then that quantum games such as the quantum prisoner's
dilemma can be thought of as the available policy space for an agent under-
going reinforcement learning. Here, however, it is known that the quantum
policy options, in for example the quantum prisoner's dilemma, are Pareto-
optimal over the classical policy options. Therefore, if the task undertaken
in quantum reinforcement learning can be thought of as having instances
of the prisoner's dilemma as subtasks, an agent with quantum strategies
available to them will perform strictly better than one with only classical
policy options, as observed by Meyer in his seminal work.
5 Conclusion
We established a game-theoretic interpretation of high-frequency trading as
the game Prisoner's Dilemma, and showed how it can be implemented as
a quantum game using quantum computing processors available over the
cloud. We argue that even today's nascent quantum technology infrastruc-
ture allows substantial improvement in the payos of the players of this
game, and that in the near future, a fully quantum internet and better
performing quantum processors will allow players to completely avoid the
dilemma via reinforced learning of contracts, as predicted by cooperative
game theory.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Nathan Benjamin, James Sully, Nathan Urban,
for useful discussions. N.B. is supported by the Computational Science
Initiative at Brookhaven National Laboratory.
References
[1] John von Neumann, Oskar Morgenstern, and Ariel Rubinstein. Theory
of Games and Economic Behavior (60th Anniversary Commemorative
Edition) . Princeton University Press, 1944.
[2] John F. Nash. Equilibrium points in n-person games. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences , 36(1):48{49, 1950.
9[3] John C. Harsanyi. Games with incomplete information played by
"bayesian" players, i-iii. part ii. bayesian equilibrium points. Manage-
ment Science , 14(5):320{334, 1968.
[4] Reinhard Selten. Multistage game models and delay supergames. The-
ory and Decision , 44:1{36, 1994.
[5] Robert J. Aumann. War and peace. Nobel Prize Lecture , 2005.
[6] J. MAYNARD SMITH and G. R. PRICE. The logic of animal conict.
Nature , 246:15{18, November 1973.
[7] A.S Elgazzar. Coopetition in quantum prisoner's dilemma and covid-19.
Quantum Information Processing , 20, 2021.
[8] David A. Meyer. Quantum strategies. Phys. Rev. Lett. , 82:1052{1055,
Feb 1999.
[9] Jens Eisert, Martin Wilkens, and Maciej Lewenstein. Quantum games
and quantum strategies. Physical Review Letters , 83(15):3077{3080,
Oct 1999.
[10] J. SHIMAMURA, A. K. ZDEMIR, F. MORIKOSHI, and N. IMOTO.
Quantum and classical cor-relations between players in game theory.
International Journal of Quantum Information , 02(01):1052, 2004.
[11] Adrian P. Flitney and Lloyd C.L. Hollenberg. Nash equilibria in quan-
tum games with generalized two-parameter strategies. Physics Letters
A, 363(5):381{388, 2007.
[12] Faisal Shah Khan, Solmeyer, Neal, Radhakrishnan Balu, and Travis
Humble. Quantum games: a review of the history, current state, and in-
terpretation. Quantum Information Processing , 17(309), October 2018.
[13] Peter Gomber, Bj orn Arndt, Marco Lutat, and Time Uhle. High-
frequency trading. Pre-print at SSSRN , June 2011.
10