Physical Artiﬁcial Intelligence: The Concept Expansion of Next-Generation
Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Yingbo Li
Hainan University
lantuzi@aliyun.comYucong Duan*
Hainan University
duanyucong@hotmail.comAnamaria-Beatrice Spulber
Visionogy
anne@visionogy.comHaoyang Che
Zeekr Group,
haoyang.che@zeekrlife.com
Zakaria Maamar
Zayed University
zakaria.maamar@zu.ac.aeZhao Li
Alibaba Group
lizhao.lz@alibaba-inc.comChen Yang
Ghent University
Chen.Yang@UGent.beYu lei
Inner Mongolia University,
yuleiimu@sohu.com
Abstract —Artiﬁcial Intelligence has been a growth catalyst to
our society and is cosidered across all idustries as a funda-
mental technology. However, its development has been limited
to the signal processing domain that relies on the generated
and collected data from other sensors. In recent research,
concepts of Digital Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Physicial Artiﬁcal
Intelligence have emerged and this can be considered a big step
in the theoretical development of Artiﬁcal Intelligence. In this
paper we explore the concept of Physicial Artiﬁcal Intelligence
and propose two subdomains: Integrated Physicial Artiﬁcal
Intelligence and Distributed Physicial Artiﬁcal Intelligence.
The paper will also examine the trend and governance of
Physicial Artiﬁcal Intelligence.
Index Terms —Physical Artiﬁcial Intelligence, PAI, Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, DIKW, Deep learning
1. Introduction
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) has been one of the most
popular topics in the Information and Communication Tech-
nologies (ICT) ﬁeld. AI powered the development of many
advanced systems such as robotics. AI used to be conﬁned
to digital signal processing such as text processing, image
object recognition, and speech recognition. However, when
considering computer science holistically, signal processing
is only a small part of the ﬁeld. The AI applications have
been extended to include robots, Internet of Things (IoT),
smart cities, etc. In [1], Miriyev and Kovac classiﬁed AI
into Digital AI which processes signals, and Physical AI in-
cluding physical robots. In this paper we explore the concept
of Physical AI and extend it to Integrated Physical AI such
as robots or Distributed Physical AI such as IoT. In [1],
authors considered Integrated Physical AI as Physical AI,
whose components are together and in a restricted space.
We propose Distributed Physical AI as a kind of Physical AI
too, whose components could be distributed in a wide space.
*Corresponding author: duanyucong@hotmail.comThe aalysis of the Physical AI concepts brings the oppor-
tunity to discuss about AI and Physical AI from a larger
perspective. Additionally, it enables us to explore further
the manifestations of Physical AI.
In this paper, we will begin by reviewing the state of the
art of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, and conclude with a discussion
about the concept of Physical Artiﬁcial Intelligence and how
can we leverage the beneﬁts of it across diffenrent domains.
Throughout the paper we will review the trends in Physical
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and the potential governence problem
implications. Addtionally, we propose to use Knowledge
Graph and Data-Information-Knowledge-Wisdom (DIKW)
to further develop the research on Physical Artiﬁcial In-
telligence. The intenrion of this paper is to advance the
theoretical development of Physical Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
2. Overview of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
AI is well known for its outperforming human capabili-
ties in popular benchmarks such ImageNet [56]. Its various
industrial applications, in both its own domains such as
Natural Language Processing (NLP), speech recognition,
face detection, and image classiﬁcation, or other disciplines
such as agriculture, biology, and chemistry has widely been
recognized.
AI originates from the principle of building a Turing
machine from neurons, a concept proposed by McCulloch
and Pitts in 1943 [2]. Since 1988 different NN milestones
such as Backpropagation algorithm continued to develop [3].
Lecun invented Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) with
backpropagation in 1998, and in 2006 the fast training
of Neural Network (NN) was addressed. Considering the
above, both NN and even AI, have begun their fast pace de-
velopment in 2012 [4]. To succeed, AI needs the support of
advanced and affordable computing hardware such as GPU
cards, and machine learning algorithms, especially NN. The
relationships between NN, AI, and other related concepts
are illustrated in Figure 1. NN is essential in powering the
AI, however, the development of the AI domain, involves
various disciplines such as knowledge modelling, a highlyarXiv:2105.06564v2  [cs.AI]  17 May 2021researched discipline that involves Knowledge Graph to
DIKW. With the increasing and fundamental importance of
NN in mind, we will start by reviewing the history and
successful algorithms of NN.
The success of deep learning originates from deep NN,
especially CNN applied to image classiﬁcation [5]. Pri-
marily, most NN algorithms were of supervised type, such
as CNN and Recurrent NN (RNN). CNN and its variants
are involved with the classiﬁcation and recognition purpose
such as image classifciation and face recognition. RNN is
different from CNN as it considers the temporal informa-
tion in the NN, and as such RNN, including its variant
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM), has become popular
in speech recognition and language translation uses. The
semi-supervised learning such as Generative Adversarial
Networks (GAN) is often used in image generation, image
enhancement, and video game [6].
Figure 1. Disciplines and techniques associated with AI AIarchitecture
Deep learning algorithms could be classiﬁed into su-
pervised, semi-supervised, unsupervised, and reinforcement
learning based on supervision level during the model train-
ing period [7]. At ﬁrst, the deep learning most supervised
algorithms have been extensively used in face recognition,
text sentiment classiﬁcation, speech recognition, and other
similar cases. When the training data is not entirely labelled,
variants of supervised deep learning algorithms such as
semi-supervised learning algorithms could be used. The
unsupervised learning on the other hand, does not rely
on training data labelling but it learns from the internal
relations caused by the initial deﬁned features, such as
Auto-Encoders(AE), GAN, and Restricted Boltzmann Ma-
chines (RBM). In reinforcement learning, the algorithms can
only obtain the incremental data instead of all pre-existing
data in each processing step.
Apart from computer science applications, AI has been
used in academia and various industries. For example, it
has been used to faciliate the prediction of the process of
catalysis utilization [8]. Other uses involved the ﬁnancial
market, where AI has been used in the dynamic pricing
and fraud detection [9]. In the energy domain, AI is usedto reduce the electricity [10] and solar modelling [11]. In
the agriculture AI has been used in the detection of fruit
ripening [12].
Although AI has proved to be useful in various domains
of research and industries, AI has also encountered a few
limitations. Most of the current AI applications are limited
to the individual applications. One example is that CNN is
useful in image classiﬁation and text classiﬁcation, while
RNN is useful in machine translation and speech recog-
nition. AI still encounters challenges in mananging trivial
details and annoying business rules, and some of these
problems have been the focus of researchers [13]. Almost all
AI algorithms need to understand binary codes or numbers,
they lack of high logical inference and problem solving
capabilities that humans have, and this is mainly because not
every real problem can be converted into pure mathematic
problems. For example, AI ﬁnds it is hard to understand the
sentence differences between the ”Macbook can be used as
the chopping board” and “Macbook is a computer” in the
architecutre concept of DIKW [14]. In addition, AI mostly
worked until now like a black, and while researchers know
AI works well, they are not clear about the reasons behind
its success for any speciﬁc problems. Therefore, Explainable
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI) [15] has been a research domain
that is focused on discovering the reasons behind the success
of some speciﬁc NN algorithms.
3. The concept expansion of Physical Artiﬁcial
Intelligence
Currently the concept of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, as de-
scribed in the above section, is related to processing the
data and signals in the computer system. Even the hardware
that is related to the AI only captures the input data and
deliver the output data from the AI system, as illustrated in
Figure 2. One example is the Smart Home [16] supported
by Amazon’s Alexa speech assistant [17]. In [1], Miriyev
and Kovac proposed the concept of Digital Artiﬁcial Intel-
ligence (DIAI) that refers to the current popular data-based
and date-processing AI.
Figure 2. The hardware architecture related to AI
Contrary to Digital AI, Miriyev and Kovac [1] have pro-
posed the concept of Physical Artiﬁcial Intelligence (PAI),
which refers to the nature-like robots that are driven by
the intelligence. Miriyev and Kovac used the bee robot to
explain the concept of PAI, a multi-discipline that combines
autonomous robots, materials, structures, and perceptions.
PAI requires the balance between software - the intelligent
system, and hardware - material, mechanics, and etc. As
illustrated in Figure 3, PAI bears its roots in the materials
science, mechanical engineering, computer science, chem-
istry and biology.
2Figure 3. Multidisciplinary nature of PAI
In the proposed concept of PAI by Miriyev and Mirko [1]
[54], PAI refers to the typical robot and robot system. In this
paper we propose to extend the concept of PAI to all the
potential applications identifying the advantages of AI for
both the hardware and software. Several examples are used
to explain the extended concept of PAI:
PAI in IoT. IoT is the typical mixed application of
the cloud, sensor, software and data analytics [18].
The robot concatenates the hardware and software
in one complete intelligent machine, while IoT can
be distributed to either a small space such as a room
or to a wide area such as the city. Since AI can be
used to improve the stability of each node of the
IoT such as a sensor or the central data analytics
and predication, IoT is a fertile application domain
for PAI. The node of IoT used for sensing and
controlling needs the support of the science and
technologies, materials, chemistry, mechanism, and
computer science, even the biology.
PAI in automobile. The self-driving car can be con-
sidered as a variant of the intelligent robot system.
The self-driving car has the same necessary fea-
tures as the normal robot: the sensor, the embedded
computing module, the mechanical system, the new
material and so on. The self-driving car is often
connected to the Internet for navigation and the latter
provides the IoT feature to the self-driving car.
PAI in agriculture. The agriculture is one of the most
successful applications of Physical Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence. The sensors including the cameras, tempera-
ture meter and hygrometer are used to monitor the
growth progress of the plants and predict the best
harvest time. The defects are often detected to alarm
the potential risk for a intervention.
PAI in healthcare. The healthcare, especially the
healthcare for the prevention, is a typical usage of
Physical Artiﬁcial Intelligence. The biological sen-
sors and the chemical sensors are used to monitor the
old man and the patient to predict the potential risks
such as falling or an unstable situation; the centrual
center is notiﬁed by the edge device when the riskhappens. The computing happends both at the edge
sides and the centrual servers.
PAI in Logistics. PAI has been extensively used in
multiple aspects of the logistics. The ”last mile”
is the expensive and hard problem of the logistic
industry at involves parcel and food delivery. Some
delivery robots and drones [19] have been used
in the delivery market to replace the humans. The
automatic sorting robot has been used in the sorting
center of the logistics [20].
In the above survey, the extended concept of PAI has
been extensively used in multiple industries outside the robot
industry. The concept of PAI is based on the interdiscipline
research of ﬁve disciplines proposed in Figure 3 [1].
4. The Trend of Physical Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Until 2012 Digital Artiﬁcial Intelligence (DIAI) mim-
icked the brain capability of logical thinking and induction
in human brain, to process the data and signals percepted by
human eyes and ears. As far as we know, the capabilities of
human beings are not limited to the logical thinking of the
brain. The brain of the human beings is only responsible for
processing the signals and transmitting commands to other
parts of the body, that are responsible for many functions,
such as movement, vision perception, sound perception,
digestion and etc. Therefore, DIAI just uncovers a limited
part of the powerful potentials of AI, while PAI like a whole
human body with respect to the whole human body, would
heavily extend the application of AI from the academics to
the industries.
PAI has the potential to use deep learning to mimick not
only the individual human but also the human society as a
whole. Robots are a typical example of Integrated PAI (IPAI)
that mimick the individual humans, and integrates the per-
ception of the physical world through multiple sensors that
collect signals and data, the induction from multiple indices,
and the physical response in the physical world as shown in
Fig. 4, that illustrates the most important modules in IPAI. A
robot’s perception, computing, and mechanical modules are
conﬁned into a limited space, while similar to the human
society Distributed PAI (DPAI) distributes the perception,
the computing and the response modules across a wide
space, such as a factory or a city, as shown in Fig. 5.
Industrial IoT system is a good illustration of DPAI [22].
PAI needs to fuse multiple streams of information in-
cluding materials, temperature, vision, sound,etc. from mul-
tiple sensors as per Fig. 3. Therefore, multimodal processing
is mandatory to understand the information in PAI. Through
the fuse of the multimodal information, PAI can easier use
more kinds of information to make better decision and better
precisions [34], [35]. The data and information sources bring
multiple kinds of data, which outperform a single source of
data, to make real-time decisions and predictions. This is a
signiﬁcant feature of PAI.
We use Fig. 6 to illustrate the components and relations
of PAI:IPAI and DPAI. IPAI will be researched and applied
3Figure 4. Integrated PAI
in both home environment and industry environment. The
home environment [23] will receive home service robots
like household robots, while the industry environment will
be extensively used in multiple areas of the Industry 4.0 [24]
from the automative to the security. DPAI will become more
and more popular when the edge computing [25] is mature
and every device is connected to the network. IoT and edge
computing are typical DPAI subdomains. Since it is popular
for every intelligent system to be online, IPAI and DPAI will
have more overlapped areas as shown in Fig. 6.
5. The DIKW Supported Physical Artiﬁcial
Intelligence
Artiﬁcial Intelligence needs a large volume of data as the
”fuel” to train the model for the tasks of the classiﬁcations
and the predictions. Digital Artiﬁcial Intelligence such as
image classiﬁcation and automatic speech recognition is
typically the approach of processing the signal and data from
the sources of the image, the sound, the text and the temporal
data. In order to organize the data used in Digital Artiﬁ-
cial Intellgence well, the researchers and industry use the
Knowledge Graph [26] to store the ontology from different
data. Knowledge graph is a complete and correct approach
to associate the semantic data. Kowledge Graph considers
all the data inside as the same hierarchical layer, but it
does not work very well in the real world. For example, the
sentence ”the spoiled food can not be eaten” represents one
knowledge or a rule, not only the data indicating ”food”. So
DIKW [14] architecture is proposed to construct the infor-
mation architecture. The DIKW architecture is illustrated in
Figure 7. In DIKW architecture, the data andinformation
could be used to infer the knowledge , while the wisdom
as partial knowledge needs the support from the data and
information . One important feature of DIKW architecture
is the presentation the 5 Ws: Who; What; When; Where ,
andWhy .Knowledge can well describe What happens.
Wisdom in DIKW represents how.Data is related to Who ,
When , and Where . And What andHow can be infered
from Information andKnowledge too.
Digital Artiﬁcial Intelligence originates from data and
signal processing, especially the text, image and acousticprocessing. In the DIKW architecture, most algorithms of
above categories belong to the Data layer. For example,
the image object recognition [27] is to use large volume
of object image data to train a model and then recognize
an object name in testing images. While, automatic speech
recognition is to convert the speech in the sound to the data
of the text. In the research, the knowledge extraction in
Digital Artiﬁcial Intelligence exists but is not as popular
as the data extraction. In the article [28] the authors use the
multimodal data processing to extract the knowledge of the
image or video, like ”One bird ﬂies in the sky”. According
to the best of our knowledge, it is rare to ﬁnd extensive
deep learning model to deal with more advanced knowl-
edge processing. Therefore, Physical Artiﬁcial Intelligence
encounters challenging problems as it needs to process
the data, information and knowledge and it is not limited
to signals as Digital Artiﬁcial Intelligence is. PAI needs
to accept and process the signal and data from at least
ﬁve categories: materials, mechanics, chemistry, bilogy, and
computer sensors. In order to deal with more categories of
signal and data, PAI has to use knowledge graph to support
the processing and storage, as illustrated in Figure 8.
As shown in Figure 8, each node of knowledge graph
will contain 5 categories of data from PAI. All data nodes of
the same category are internally and organically associated
to one another. Knowledge graph could handle the com-
plexity of multiple-indices data. So in Figure 9 we propose
to integrate 5 categoris of data with 5 Ws and 4 layers
of DIKW. Thus the semantic information of PAI could be
inferred and stored in DIKW architecture while keep its
original relations to the metadata and other basic data.
6. Physical Artiﬁcial Intelligence Governance
and Sustainable Development
Digitial Artiﬁcial Intellgience has been facing the chal-
lenges of risk and governance problems [55]. Among the
challenges for DIAI, the most important challenges will be
discussed in this section:
The security of DIAI [29]. The training and pre-
diction of AI model needs large volume of data,
so the security of the data storage is important.
The storage security will need both hardware and
software protection. The data masking [30] is often
used to separate the data with the original source in
the software and algorithm level protection.
The fake data of DIAI. Deepfake [31] attracted much
attention when it appeared on the Internet. Deepfake
could convert the human face in the video to the
desired face, and in many situations the coverted
video looks real. The fake image and video cause
the doubt of ”seeing is believing”, which could lead
to the social and legal problem.
The social privacy of DIAI. The face recognition
in the public space has been banned and identiﬁed
as illegal in many countries [32]. DIAI has enabled
the tracking of our behavior as easy as possible.
4Figure 5. Distributed PAI
Figure 6. IPAI and DPAI
Figure 7. DIKW architecture
In addition, DIAI could easily track the online data
including the social media and infer the proﬁles of a
person. Therefore, the social privacy has been a big
focus in the past years.
The bias in DIAI. In our society the bias exists
even if it is hidden, for example the data from the
Internet. Most of training data of DIAI is from web
source, which means that the training model of DIAI
naturally contains the property of bias. This bias has
been found in the hiring screening AI system [33].
Physical Artiﬁcial Intelligence (PAI) has more problems
to resolve because of its characteristics of complexity and
ubiquitousness compared to DIAI:
Figure 8. Knowledge graph supported PAI
The existence problem. PAI like IoT needs more
extensive installation of multiple kinds of sensors.
If it is in a limited space like a factory, it does not
have much regulation problem. However, if the space
is extended to a larger space which is not under
the same regulation, PAI will face more problems
of regulation and social problem.
The information organization problem. As discussed
in the previous section, the organization of multiple
kinds and multiple layers of data and information
will cause the problem of complexity. The proposed
Knowledge graph and DIKW supported PAI could
be the potential solution.
Cannikin Law. The development of PAI depends on
at least 5 disciplines of materials science, mechan-
ical engineering, chemistry, biology and computer
science. Therefore, the slower development of one
discipline will cause the problem of cannikin law
and prohibit the development of PAI.
The social acceptance. Similar to the dilemma of
DIAI, the ubiquitous application of PAI will cause
the worry of the society regarding to the unemploy-
ment, the privacy and etc.
We illustrates above problem of PAI in Figure 9.
As the future format of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Physical
Artiﬁcial Intelligence will be the next popular research
topic following the Digital Artiﬁcial Intelligence, because
Artiﬁcial Intelligence will be more and more applied in
other industries. Physical Artiﬁcial Intelligence will sup-
5Figure 9. PAI governence problems
port the development of the mechanics or the agriculture
because of their hardware characteristics. Physical Artiﬁcial
Intelligence will advance AI application as a fundamental
technology for the world.
7. Conclusion
In this paper we have started by reviewing the basic
knowledge of artiﬁcial intelligence, including its history,
categories and popular algorithms. Then we reviewed the
concept of Physical Artiﬁcal Intelligence proposed by Aslan
Miriyev and Mirko Kovac, and discussed the reason of
extending the concept of Physical Aritiﬁcial Intelligence
by Integrated Physical Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Distributed
Physical Artiﬁcial Intelligence. After that, we proposed to
use DIKW and knowledge graph to extend the concept of
Physical Artiﬁcial Intelligence. Finally we discussed the
governance of Physical Artiﬁcial Intelligence and its sustain-
able development, compared to the current popular topics of
Digital Artiﬁcial Intelligence governance. We wish to use
this paper to discuss the potential development of Physical
Artiﬁcial Intelligence as the next generation of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, and inspire more research and application of
Physcial Artiﬁcal Intelligence with the discussed theoretical
support.
Acknowledgments
Supported by Natural Science Foundation of China
Project (No. 61662021 and No.72062015).
References
[1] Miriyev A, Kova ˇc M. Skills for physical artiﬁcial intelligence[J].
Nature Machine Intelligence, 2020, 2(11): 658-660.
[2] Zhang L, Zhang B. A geometrical representation of McCulloch-Pitts
neural model and its applications[J]. IEEE Transactions on Neural
Networks, 1999, 10(4): 925-929.
[3] Hecht-Nielsen R. Theory of the backpropagation neural network. Neu-
ral networks for perception. Academic Press, 1992: 65-93.[4] Yadav N, Yadav A, Kumar M. History of neural networks[M]//An
Introduction to Neural Network Methods for Differential Equations.
Springer, Dordrecht, 2015: 13-15.
[5] Alom M Z, Taha T M, Yakopcic C, et al. The history began from
alexnet: A comprehensive survey on deep learning approaches[J]. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1803.01164, 2018.
[6] Creswell A, White T, Dumoulin V , et al. Generative adversarial
networks: An overview[J]. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 2018,
35(1): 53-65.
[7] Dey A. Machine learning algorithms: a review[J]. International Journal
of Computer Science and Information Technologies, 2016, 7(3): 1174-
1179.
[8] Li H, Zhang Z, Liu Z. Application of artiﬁcial neural networks for
catalysis: a review[J]. Catalysts, 2017, 7(10): 306.
[9] Ryman-Tubb N F, Krause P, Garn W. How Artiﬁcial Intelligence
and machine learning research impacts payment card fraud detection:
A survey and industry benchmark[J]. Engineering Applications of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2018, 76: 130-157.
[10] Cheng L, Yu T. A new generation of AI: A review and perspective
on machine learning technologies applied to smart energy and electric
power systems[J]. International Journal of Energy Research, 2019,
43(6): 1928-1973.
[11] Belu R. Artiﬁcial intelligence techniques for solar energy and photo-
voltaic applications[M]//Robotics: Concepts, methodologies, tools, and
applications. IGI Global, 2014: 1662-1720.
[12] May Z, Amaran M H. Automated oil palm fruit grading system using
artiﬁcial intelligence[J]. Int. J. Eng. Sci, 2011, 11(21): 30-35.
[13] Xu Y , Shieh C H, van Esch P, et al. AI customer service: Task com-
plexity, problem-solving ability, and usage intention[J]. Australasian
Marketing Journal (AMJ), 2020, 28(4): 189-199.
[14] Frick ´e M. The knowledge pyramid: the DIKW hierarchy[J]. KO
KNOWLEDGE ORGANIZATION, 2019, 46(1): 33-46.
[15] Arrieta A B, D ´ıaz-Rodr ´ıguez N, Del Ser J, et al. Explainable Ar-
tiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI): Concepts, taxonomies, opportunities and
challenges toward responsible AI[J]. Information Fusion, 2020, 58:
82-115.
[16] Marikyan D, Papagiannidis S, Alamanos E. A systematic review
of the smart home literature: A user perspective[J]. Technological
Forecasting and Social Change, 2019, 138: 139-154.
[17] Karppi T, Granata Y . Non-artiﬁcial non-intelligence: Amazon’s Alexa
and the frictions of AI[J]. AI & SOCIETY , 2019, 34(4): 867-876.
[18] Srinivasan C R, Rajesh B, Saikalyan P, et al. A review on the different
types of Internet of Things (IoT)[J]. Journal of Advanced Research in
Dynamical and Control Systems, 2019, 11(1): 154-158.
[19] Janeb ¨ack E, Kristiansson M. Friendly robot delivery: Designing an
autonomous delivery droid for collaborative consumption[D]. , 2019.
[20] Dekhne A, Hastings G, Murnane J, et al. Automation in logistics:
Big opportunity, bigger uncertainty[J]. McKinsey Q, 2019: 1-12.
[21] Marechal C, Mikolajewski D, Tyburek K, et al. Survey on AI-Based
Multimodal Methods for Emotion Detection[J]. 2019.
[22] Cheng J, Chen W, Tao F, et al. Industrial IoT in 5G environment
towards smart manufacturing[J]. Journal of Industrial Information In-
tegration, 2018, 10: 10-19.
[23] Wilson G, Pereyda C, Raghunath N, et al. Robot-enabled support
of daily activities in smart home environments[J]. Cognitive Systems
Research, 2019, 54: 258-272.
[24] Dalenogare L S, Benitez G B, Ayala N F, et al. The expected
contribution of Industry 4.0 technologies for industrial performance[J].
International Journal of Production Economics, 2018, 204: 383-394.
[25] Yu W, Liang F, He X, et al. A survey on the edge computing for the
Internet of Things[J]. IEEE access, 2017, 6: 6900-6919.
6[26] Wang Q, Mao Z, Wang B, et al. Knowledge graph embedding:
A survey of approaches and applications[J]. IEEE Transactions on
Knowledge and Data Engineering, 2017, 29(12): 2724-2743.
[27] Sukanya C M, Gokul R, Paul V . A survey on object recognition
methods[J]. International Journal of Science, Engineering and Com-
puter Technology, 2016, 6(1): 48.
[28] He X, Deng L. Deep learning for image-to-text generation: A techni-
cal overview[J]. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 2017, 34(6): 109-
116.
[29] Gil L, Liska A. Security with AI and Machine Learning[M]. O’Reilly
Media, Incorporated, 2019.
[30] Asenjo J C. Data masking, encryption, and their effect on classiﬁca-
tion performance: trade-offs between data security and utility[J]. 2017.
[31] G ¨uera D, Delp E J. Deepfake video detection using recurrent neural
networks[C]//2018 15th IEEE International Conference on Advanced
Video and Signal Based Surveillance (A VSS). IEEE, 2018: 1-6.
[32] Deb D, Wiper S, Gong S, et al. Face recognition: Primates in
the wild[C]//2018 IEEE 9th International Conference on Biometrics
Theory, Applications and Systems (BTAS). IEEE, 2018: 1-10.
[33] Dattner B, Chamorro-Premuzic T, Buchband R, et al. The legal and
ethical implications of using AI in hiring[J]. Harvard Business Review,
2019, 25.
[34] Meyer T, Schmitt M, Dietzek B, et al. Accumulating advantages,
reducing limitations: Multimodal nonlinear imaging in biomedical
sciences–the synergy of multiple contrast mechanisms[J]. Journal of
biophotonics, 2013, 6(11-12): 887-904.
[35] Deng L. Deep learning: from speech recognition to language and mul-
timodal processing[J]. APSIPA Transactions on Signal and Information
Processing, 2016, 5.
[36] Gadepally V , Goodwin J, Kepner J, et al. Ai enabling technologies:
A survey[J]. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.03592, 2019.
[37] Cully, A., Clune, J., Tarapore, D. & Mouret, J.-B. Nature 521,
503–507 (2015).
[38] Bilodeau, R. A. & Kramer, R. K. Front. Robot. AI 4, 48 (2017).
[39] Petersen, K. H., Napp, N., Stuart-Smith, R., Rus, D. & Kovac, M.
Sci. Robot. 4, eaau8479 (2019).
[40] Xia, B. et al. Actuators 9, 62 (2020).
[41] 5. Pena-Francesch, A., Jung, H., Demirel, M. C. & Sitti, M. Nat.
Mater. 19, 1230–1235 (2020).
[42] Sadeghi, A., Mondini, A. & Mazzolai, B. Soft Robot. 4, 211–223
(2017).
[43] Man, K. & Damasio, A. Nat. Mach. Intell. 1, 446–452 (2019).
[44] Sol, J. A. H. P. et al. Chem. Commun. 55, 1726–1729 (2019).
[45] Pfeifer, R., Bongard, J. & Grand, S. How the Body Shapes the Way
We Think: A New View of Intelligence (MIT Press, 2007).
[46] Meng ¨uc ¸, Y ., Correll, N., Kramer, R. & Paik, J. Sci. Robot. 2, eaar4527
(2017).
[47] Lipson, H. & Pollack, J. B. Nature 406, 974–978 (2000).
[48] Yang, G.-Z. et al. Sci. Robot. 3, eaar7650 (2018).
[49] Kovac, M. Science 352, 895–896 (2016).
[50] Hauser, H. Nat. Mach. Intell. 1, 338–339 (2019).
[51] Howard, D. et al. Nat. Mach. Intell. 1, 12–19 (2019).
[52] Chrisley, R. & Ziemke, T. In Encyclopedia of Cognitive Science
(Wiley, 2006).
[53] Miriyev, A., Stack, K. & Lipson, H. Nat. Commun. 8, 596 (2017).
[54] Jo ˜ao Paulo Costeira and Pedro Lima (editors), “A simple guide to
Physical AI”. Published on the AI4EU platform: http://ai4eu.eu. June
24, 2020.
[55] Dafoe, A. (2018). AI governance: a research agenda. Governance
of AI Program, Future of Humanity Institute, University of Oxford:
Oxford, UK.
[56] Deng J, Dong W, Socher R, et al. Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical
image database[C]//2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition. Ieee, 2009: 248-255.
7