Geometric insights into robust portfolio construction
Lara Dalmeyera, Tim Gebbiea
aDepartment of Statistical Sciences, University of Cape Town, Rondebosch 7701, South Africa
Abstract
We investigate and extend the result that an α-weight angle from unconstrained quadratic portfolio optimisations
has an upper bound dependent on the condition number of the covariance matrix. This is known to imply that better
conditioned covariance matrices produce weights from unconstrained mean-variance optimisations that are better aligned
with each assets expected return. Here we relate the inequality between the α-weight angle and the condition number
to extend the result to include portfolio optimisations with gearing constraints to provide an extended family of robust
optimisations. We use this to argue that in general the equally weighted portfolio is not preferable to the mean-variance
portfolio even with poor forecast ability and a badly conditioned covariance matrix. We confirm the distribution free
theoretical arguments with a simple Gaussian simulation.
Keywords: mean-variance optimization, Kantorovich inequality, gearing constraints
MSC: 91G10 90C20 62P05
1. Introduction
Using a geometric construction that relates the an-
gle between the vector of expected returns αand port-
folio weights ωdetermined under an unconstrained mean-
variance optimisation, Golts and Jones [19] were able to
quantify the distortions induced by the optimisation pro-
cess without making direct distributional assumptions about
the underlying data generating process. They were able to
link this angle directly to the condition number of the co-
variance matrix by showing that this angle has an upper
bound dependent on the condition number. The interpre-
tation is novel because of its geometric construction and
the weak distributional assumptions this allows. When
a covariance matrix is ill-conditioned, or close to degener-
ate, the α-weight angle should be very large; whereas well-
conditioned matrices ensure the angle remains within tight
bounds. This is much more than merely a representation
change, because it provides a geometric explanation, why
an equally weighted portfolio is not always preferable to a
mean-variance solution even in the presence of estimation
uncertainty.
In general portfolio construction, a key question re-
mains to what extent one should drag the optimal bets
towards the direction of expected asset returns. In the un-
constrained case this is clear because in the mean-variance
setting the resulting portfolios will be multipliers, or geared
realisations, of the optimal risky portfolio, that are the re-
sult of solving a Sharpe ratio maximisation. In the con-
strained case this appears less clear because of how con-
straints can dominate the solution space.
Email addresses: DLMLAR001@myuct.ac.za (Lara Dalmeyer),
tim.gebbie@uct.ac.za (Tim Gebbie)Towards this end we investigate the mathematical re-
lationship between the α-weight angle, and the condition
of the covariance matrix in more generality. Golts and
Jones [19] argued the case for dragging optimal weights
towards the direction of αfor a family of unconstrained
quadratic optimisations. We extend this family of portfo-
lio choice problems to include a gearing constraint and to
consider whether their geometric insights are more gener-
ally applicable for practical investment management deci-
sion making. The gearing constraint defines exactly how
much of the portfolio should be invested (whether it be
fully invested, partially invested or geared) and is a fun-
damental portfolio construction constraint in much of the
unit-trust, exchange traded fund and the related collective
investment scheme industry. This constraint is to be dif-
ferentiated from a leverage constraint, which relates the
size of portfolio bets relative to a level of borrowing.
The important point in the geometric setting is that the
gearing constrained optimal portfolio has a weakened up-
per bound. Golts and Jones [19] relied on the Kantorovich
inequality [24], we argue that this can be weakened be-
cause of the impact of the constraint using [4]. Noting
that with improved conditioning of the covariance matrix,
we can reduce the upper bound on the angle between the
optimal risky portfolio and α, which would in turn reduce
the overall angle between the optimal portfolio and the di-
rection of α. To our knowledge, this insight is novel; albeit
subtle.
Concretely, we show that a minimisation over the total
α-angle φis equivalent to minimising the angle between
the optimal risky portfolio and the direction of expected
returns. This then extends the unconstrained result and
motivates why the combination of an α-angle minimisation
Preprint submitted to Elsevier December 3, 2024arXiv:2107.06194v5  [q-fin.PM]  2 Dec 2024is equally useful both in the unconstrained and constrained
cases. The key point is then that to minimise the overall
angle between the optimal portfolio and the expected re-
turns we can minimise the angle between the optimal risky
portfolio and the expected returns.
Reducing the angle between the weights and expected
return vector is not equivalent to the implementation of
a return maximisation, or return maximisation constraint.
The case of pure return maximisation would result in a
portfolio that weighs toward the asset with the greatest
expected return, and not the direction of the expected
return vector in general. In practice the α-weight angle
should never be zero as there is always a residual correla-
tion between the assets. In mean variance optimisations
there is always a conundrum due to correlation specifica-
tion error – and then determining the degree of shrinkage
that should be adopted to best reflect this. The test of
how much one should intervene can only be determined
by out-of-period portfolio performance simulation, or with
direct distributional assumptions (as demonstrated with
simple simulations in Section 5).
However, we provide a geometric explanation of why,
when faced with estimation uncertainty using a quadratic
optimisation, the direction of returns is still of value even
if the quantum of expected returns is not, without making
strong a-priori distributional assumptions.
At a superficial level this work seems to merely promote
the important benefits related to improving the condition-
ing of the covariance matrix in the out-of-sample perfor-
mance of an asset portfolio if the estimated covariance ma-
trix is used for decision making – a widely known idea that
is common cause. However, here we specifically promote
these benefits in the sense of reducing the angle between
the direction of the optimal portfolio in the control space
relative to that of the expected asset returns. This is a
refined perspective with a sound theoretical motivation.
This specificity better explains where andhowimproved
conditioning may be beneficial.
Theoretically, the key insight is that it is not merely co-
variance matrix inversion, hence error maximisation more
generally, that is problematic, but rather that the inver-
sion of a poorly conditioned covariance matrix pushes the
direction of an optimal portfolio erroneously away from the
direction of expected returns. This implies that when im-
proving the conditioning of a covariance matrix this should
be done in a way that pulls the optimal portfolio back to-
wards the direction of expected returns – irrespective of
whether or not one may be in the presence of constraints.
Merely improving the conditioning may prove to be sub-
optimal.
Practically, these insights support the perspective pro-
moted by Allen et al. [1], that an equally weighted portfolio
is not always preferable to a mean-variance solution. We
provide a distribution free argument that even with poor
forecast ability and the impact of estimation uncertainty,
that there can be an advantage to using mean-variance
portfolio theory, over an equally weighted (or any riskonly) portfolio construction.
1.1. Estimation uncertainty
Quadratic or mean–variance analysis was introduced
by Harry Markowitz in his seminal 1952 paper [40] to es-
tablish what is today known as Modern Portfolio Theory.
Within this framework a rational investor selects a port-
folio based on the trade-off between estimated expected
return and risk. Despite the elegance of this, the practi-
cal implementation has a variety of short-comings, with
optimised portfolios perceived to to “behave badly” out
of sample. Michaud [42] argues that mean variance opti-
misation often leads to non-intuitive results with unstable
weights, further characterising it as being an“error max-
imiser”.
Additionally, even if means and variances could accu-
rately represent asset class distributions, the theory as-
sumes both future expected returns, and the covariance
matrix of asset returns are known, or even that they can
be known. The presence of estimation error in input pa-
rameters unfortunately makes the use of Modern Portfolio
Theory in its classical Markowitz formulation impractical
– this is well understood and common cause [44]. The
short-comings of mean-variance optimisation has been ex-
tensively discussed in the literature, with highlights in-
cluding the work by Best and Grauer [6], Frankfurter et al.
[16], Jobson and Korkie [29, 30], Zimmermann and Nier-
dermayer [50], Broadie [8], Michaud [42], and Chopra and
Ziemba [12].
A broad variety of different forms and approaches to
robust optimisation are documented in an extensive lit-
erature. As a small subset, Costa and Paiva [14], Hall-
dorsson and Tutuncu [21], Goldfarb and Iyengar [18], and
Ceria and Stubbs [11] have proposed various, and unique,
specifications of the uncertainty set of the input param-
eters. Performance and risk metrics of robust portfolios
have been shown to be distinct from [40] optimal portfo-
lios. Tutuncu and Koenig [48] showed that robust port-
folios tend to investment in fewer assets and display less
turnover over time. Increase in the size of the uncertainty
sets, when using robust portfolio optimisation procedures,
means they tend to under-perform in the more likely sce-
narios, but display more reasonable tail behaviour.
In order to ameliorate the effect of estimation errors
in the estimates of expected returns, attempts have been
made to create better and more stable mean-variance opti-
mal portfolios by utilising expected return estimators that
have a better behaviour when used in the context of the
mean-variance framework [44]. One of the more common
techniques is the utilisation of James-Stein estimators (see
Jobson and Korkie [30]) to shrink the expected returns to-
wards the average expected return based on the volatility
of the asset and the distance of its expected return from
the average. Jorion [31] developed a similar technique that
shrinks the expected return estimate towards the mini-
mum variance portfolio. The area of robust statistics (see
[10]) has recently been employed to create stable expected
2return estimates as well. Chopra and Ziemba [12] show
that errors in the sample mean estimate have a larger im-
pact on the out-of-sample performance than errors in the
sample covariance estimate.
In a similar way to estimating robust expected return
inputs, one can also build a more robust process through
focusing on the estimation of the covariance matrix, which
is inverted in the mean variance optimisation process. Pa-
pers investigating different covariance matrix estimation
techniques include Disatnik and Benninga [15], Clarke et al.
[13], Jagannathan and Ma [28] and Bengtsson and Holst
[5].This paper makes use of the methodology employed
by Ledoit and Wolf [34], who argue that a shrunk covari-
ance matrix should be used instead of the sample covari-
ance matrix as it contains significant estimation error.The
shrunk matrix represents a weighted average of the sample
covariance matrix, and another structured matrix.
Black and Litterman [7] combine investor’s views with
expected returns to generate more robust portfolios. They
use reverse optimisation, using portfolio weights and the
covariance matrix as inputs and providing the expected
returns as output, avoiding the problem of estimation error
in expected returns.
The Bayesian approach has been widely recommended
for dealing with the estimation errors in the sample esti-
mates, which involves eliminating the dependence of the
optimisation process on the true parameters by replacing
them with a prior distribution of the fund manager’s view.
Brown [9] and Kan and Zhou [32] both investigate the
Bayesian approach.
Other attempts to make improvements on the Markowitz
mean-variance optimisation issues also includes the portfo-
lio re-sampling methodology of Michaud [43] and Lai et al.
[33]. Michaud introduces a statistical re-sampling tech-
nique that indirectly considers estimation error by averag-
ing the individual optimal portfolios that result from opti-
mising with respect to many randomly generated expected-
return and risk estimates. However, portfolio re-sampling
is an ad-hoc methodology that has pitfalls (see Scherer
[47]). Lai et al. [33] propose a solution to a stochas-
tic optimisation problem by extending Markowitz’s mean-
variance portfolio optimisation theory to the case where
the means and covariances of the asset returns for the next
investment period are unknown.
There are a variety of approaches to shrinking the co-
variance matrix gap between the largest and smallest eigen-
values, these include optimisation based approaches [46]
whose performance is measured using Sharpe ratio’s and
certainty equivalents. Such approaches are novel, but do
not directly address the issue of back-test over-fitting [3]
nor do they provide distribution free setting with theoret-
ical bounds for both constrained and unconstrained port-
folio’s.
Golts and Jones [19] provided a novel geometric per-
spective on robust portfolio construction using insights
that arise when one separates the direction and magnitude
of the portfolio position vector. They make no assump-tions about the distribution of the returns and suggest
making the covariance matrix better-conditioned by con-
straining the angle between the vector of optimised weights
and expected returns – the “alpha” angle. The motivation
for implementing a minimisation of the α-angle is based on
showing that this angle is bound by the condition number
of the estimated covariance matrix.
Here we demonstrate this relationship geometrically
and mathematically using an extension of the Kantorovich
inequality [24, 22] provided by Bauer and Householder [4];
this elegant machinery will be shown as useful in determin-
ing why this relationship exists (outlines to both theorems
are provided in Appendix A and Appendix B).
The theoretical advantage of the geometric approach
is not only the distribution free setting, but the theorems
directly motivate the choice of shrinkage in terms of the an-
gle between the portfolio controls and the direction of asset
returns, and thus provide a direct and unique approach.
This is particularly useful if one is able to predict returns
and correlations intermittently in real financial markets.
Inspiration for this idea can be seen in Axelsson [2]
where much of the geometric interpretation around matri-
ces is described.
1.2. The efficient frontier and α-weight angle
Consider a portfolio with nassets, expected return vec-
torα, covariance matrix Σ, and a fixed portfolio mean αp.
To find this portfolio on the efficient frontier with asset
weights θ, we perform a portfolio variance minimization
[40, 41]:
arg min
θ1
2θ′Σθ
s.t.α′θ=αp. (1)
Here we can use the Lagrange method and solve the Kuhn-
Tucker conditions to find the optimal portfolio allocation
as follows:
θ∗=αp
α′Σ−1αΣ−1α. (2)
This is a classical Markowitz-type optimisation. It can be
shown that all optimisation solutions where there are no
gearing, or long-only constraints, are of similar form. The
solutions θ∝Σ−1αall show that the results are calculated
using the inverse of the covariance matrix contracted in the
direction of the expected returns.
Various criticisms with regards to Markowitz portfolios
noted that mean-variance optimised portfolios can have
weights ( θ) that are quite different from the original “al-
phas” ( α). To quantify this difference one can look at the
angle ( ϕ) between the vector of expected returns, α, and
the vector of optimised weights, θ∗where ϕ∈[0, π/2].
The mathematical formula for the angle is as follows:
cos(ϕ) =α′θ
|α||θ|=α′θ√
α′α√
θ′θ. (3)
The smaller this angle, the more aligned optimal portfo-
lio weights are to expected α’s which would indicate a
3more reasonable and intuitive optimisation result. A poor
optimisation result would be indicated by an almost per-
pendicular angle close to 90◦.
Golts and Jones [19] describe the mathematical rela-
tionship between this angle and the condition of the co-
variance matrix; showing how a well conditioned covari-
ance matrix can ensure a smaller α-weight angle (because
cos(ϕ) is closer to one), and hence a more reasonable op-
timisation result. They show how this angle is bounded
above zero by the condition number of the covariance ma-
trix:
cos(ϕ)≥2rκ
(κ+ 1)2where κ=ρmax
ρmin. (4)
Here the condition number κis the ratio of the largest
eigenvalue, ρmax, to the smallest eigenvalue, ρmin. It is
important to note that although cos( ϕ) has a lower bound,
the actual angle ϕhas an upper bound, as cos( ϕ) decreases
where ϕ∈[0, π/2] increases.
Despite the intuitive nature of the result, the math-
ematical reasoning behind how this relationship came to
be in the Golts and Jones [19] paper was not fully de-
scribed and was only applied to portfolio optimisations
that were unconstrained. To clarify, this paper refers to
unconstrained optimisations as those described in Table
1, despite the fact that optimisation I and II each have a
risk and return constraint respectively, and as the paper
will show, some constraints are implicit in the problem.
The optimisations described in Table 2, where gearing con-
straints are explicitly put in place, are referred to as the
constrained optimisations.
1.3. Unconstrained α-weight angle
Theorem 1. Kantorovich Inequality [24]
LetT∈Mn(R)be a symmetric positive definite matrix
with eigenvalues 0≤ρn≤. . .≤ρ1. Then for all v∈
Rn\{0},
(v′v)2
(v′Tv) (v′T−1v)≥4ρ1ρn
(ρ1+ρn)2. (5)
We first motivate the original unconstrained result in
our Eqn.(4) [19] using Theorem 1 the Kantorovich inequal-
ity [24, 23, 22] – this is a special case of the Cauchy-
Schwarz inequality. We provide an outline of the proof
of Theorem 1 following [23] in Appendix A. Here we will
use equations 5 (From Theorem 1) and 2, and that any
positive semi-definite matrix Σ can be decomposed into
the product of two symmetric matrices S.
We start with optimal unconstrained portfolio solution
from Eqn. 2:
θ∗∝Σ−1α, (6)
This is substituted into the α-weight angle using Eqn. (3)
cos(ϕ) =α′(Σ−1α)√
α′αp
(Σ−1α)′(Σ−1α), (7)No Gearing Constraint Portfolio Choice
# Optimisation Constraints
Iarg max
θ
θ′α	
σ2
p=θ′Σθ≤σ2
0
soln:θ∗
1=
σ0√
C
Σ−1α=σ0B√
Cθα
IIarg min
θ1
2θ′Σθ
αp=θ′α≥α0
soln:θ∗
2= α0
C
Σ−1α=α0B
Cθα
IIIarg max
θn
θ′α−γ
2θ′Σθo
soln:θ∗
3=1
γΣ−1α=B
γθα
IVarg max
θθ′α√
θ′Σθ
soln:θ∗
4=
σp
αp
Σ−1α= g0
B
Σ−1α=g0θα
Table 1: Some classical unconstrained portfolio optimisation prob-
lems from [19]. Here portfolios employ no explicit gearing constraint,
and positions may be unconstrained long/short. Here I is a return
maximisation problem with risk bound, II is a risk minimisation
problem with a return bound, III is a conventional mean-variance
optimisation, and IV is the Sharpe ratio optimisation. In III γis
the inverse risk aversion parameter. In IV the risk free rate rfis
assumed to be zero. Here A=1′Σ−11,B=α′Σ−11=1Σ−1α,
C=α′Σ−1αandD=AC−B2. All the portfolio’s are implicitly
geared versions of the optimal risky portfolio θα. Optimisation IV
requires an explicit choice of g0to set the magnitude of the optimal
portfolio which is typical set to one: g0= 1. The optimal portfolio
controls θ∗are in the last column for each optimizations in the table.
The subscript ion the solution θ∗
iis the number of the optimisation
in question.
where, because a symmetric matrix is equivalent to its own
transpose:
cos(ϕ) =α′Σ−1α√
α′α√
α′Σ−2α. (8)
Using that an inverse covariance matrix can be factored in
terms of a symmetric matrix S, where Σ−1=S′S, Eqn.(8)
becomes:
cos(ϕ) =α′S′Sα√
α′α√
α′S′SS′Sα. (9)
Now let x=Sαso that α=S−1x,x′=α′Sandα′=
x′S−1, and substitute these into Eqn.(9) to find:
cos(ϕ) =x′x√
x′Σx√
x′Σ−1x. (10)
The right hand side of Eqn.(10) is the square root of the
left hand side of the Kantorovich inequality from Eqn. (5)
thereby implying that this is bounded:
cos2(ϕ) =(x′x)2
(x′Σx)(x′Σ−1x)≥4ρ1ρn
(ρ1+ρn)2, (11)
where Σ has ordered eigenvalues 0 ≤ρn≤. . .≤ρ1.
Following Golts and Jones [19] with the condition num-
ber of the covariance matrix: κ=ρ1/ρn, we can then show
4that an upper bound to the α-weight angle exists, and we
recover Eqn.(4):
cos2(ϕ)≥4ρ1ρn
(ρ1+ρn)2=4κ
(κ+ 1)2where κ=ρmax
ρmin(12)
This is the result given in [19], but explicitly derived here
to motivate the form of our constrained extension. This
shows that an improved condition number of the covari-
ance matrix can improve the robustness of the optimisa-
tion procedure, but only when constraints, such as that
with gearing, a full investment constraint, or a long-only
portfolio constraint, are ignored.
The idea is that as the conditioning of the covariance
deteriorates the α-angle necessarily increases. With im-
proved conditioning, when there are no constraints, then
the optimal portfolio weights can more easily align with
the directions of the asset expected returns (See Figure 1)
and so improve the out-of-sample portfolio performance.
This is because as the optimisation aligns with the direc-
tion of the expected returns, and if the expected returns
adequately reflect future scenario’s, then this implies im-
proved out-of-sample portfolio performance.
ω1ω2ω3
αθ∗θα
ϕ
Figure 1: Unconstrained geometry of the α-angle where αare the
asset expected returns, θ∗some optimal portfolio weights, θαis the
optimal risky portfolio, and ϕis the α-angle. In the unconstrained
caseθαandθ∗are aligned because the optimal portfolio is just a
scaled version of the optimal risky portfolio. The optimal portfolio
is in the direction of the vector Σ−1αand hence does not in general
align with the αdirection: ˆα. If the covariance matrix Σ is shrunk
to the identity matrix then all three vectors will align.
2. The constrained α-weight angle
Many funds have gearing restrictions and may not be
outright short an instrument i.e.θ≥0. A portfolio op-
timisation enforcing a long only constraint often has the
problem that it cannot ensure that closed form solutions
can be found. It is similarly problematic to include margin
and diversity constraints. A margin constraint is required
when investing in futures, or where some sort of deposit
proportional to the investment made is required [17, 20]:
i.e.P
imi|θi|= 1, for mithe margin account required for
i-th asset. When the level of margining is the same for allthe assets this can be written as a leverage constraint of
the form: 1′|θ|=ℓ0.
However, it is possible to get closed form solutions for
a gearing constrained optimisation; using the constraint
θ′1=g0for some gearing parameter g0. A fully invested
portfolio with constraint 1′θ= 1 is then a special case.
These can be implemented as: a return maximisation with
a linear and quadratic constraint, a portfolio variance min-
imisation with two linear constraints, a mean-variance op-
timisation with a linear constraint, or a Sharpe ratio max-
imisation with a linear gearing constraint (See Table 2).
2.1. Upper bound on the α-weight angle
Theorem 2. Bauer and Householder Inequality [4]
Letp,q∈Rnsuch thatp′q
∥p∥2∥q∥2≥cos(ψ)with0≥ψ≥π
2.
Then
(p′q)2
(p′Tp) (q′T−1q)≥4
κψ+ 2 + κ−1
ψ(13)
where Tis the same positive semi-definite matrix used in
Theorem 1 and
κψ=ρ1
ρn1 + sin( ψ)
1−sin(ψ)(14)
is a function of the angle between the vectors p, and q.
To prove that the upper bound on the α-weight an-
gle exists for linearly constrained mean-variance optimi-
sations, we make use of the result derived by Bauer and
Householder [4] who extended the Kantorovich inequal-
ity (Theorem 1) to Theorem 2. A direct by construction
proof for this is investigated by Huang and Zhou [26]. For
completeness we rather outline the proof of Theorem 2 fol-
lowing the original approach of [4] in Appendix B. We note
that in Theorem 2, and in particular from Eqn. 14, that
κψis unbound above and bound by κbelow: κψ∈[κ,∞]
and hence we have that κψ≥κ. This condition is weaker
than that of Theorem 1:
4κ
(κ+ 1)2≥4κψ
(κψ+ 1)2where κ=ρmax
ρmin, (15)
because κψ≥κfor 0≥ψ≥π
2.
2.2. Constrained α-angle
Following from the definition of the α-weight angle
from Eqn. (3) we can again find an expression for the
angle, however this angle is now that related to the con-
strained optimisation angle φfromα′θ∗=|α||θ∗|cos(φ)
using that θ∗= Σ−1zrepresents some general linear so-
lution of the constrained problem where in general z̸=α
(e.g.using Eqn.(33), or equivalently use wfrom Eqn.(38)),
into the α-weight angle Eqn.(3) for the new angle (say) φ:
cos(φ) =α′θ∗
√α αp
θ∗′θ∗=α′Σ−1z√
α′α√
z′Σ−2z. (16)
5Now, as performed in equations (8) to (10) we exploit the
properties of the positive semi-definite matrix Σ−1=S′S
to make the substitutions: x=Sαandy=Sz. The
desired result then follows from Theorem 2:
cos(φ) =x′y√
x′Σxp
y′Σ−1y≥s
4κψ
(κψ+ 1)2. (17)
If, for some angle ψ, where ψ∈[0,π
2] and ψ < φ :
cos2(φ)≥4κψ
(κψ+ 1)2where κψ=ρmax
ρmin(1 + sin( ψ))
(1−sin(ψ)).
(18)
Then the α-weight angle is remains bound above by the
condition number of the covariance matrix: κ. This ex-
tends the geometric interpretation to include linear port-
folio constraints, because the α-angle is bounded below.
Here with more generality, and thus as a weakened condi-
tion, to again imply that poor conditioning will limit our
ability to align the portfolio weights with the expected re-
turns, but again, without making explicit distributional
assumptions about the data generating process.
There is now a tension between the linear constraint,
the alignment of the optimal control with the direction of
the expected returns, and the impact of the conditioning
that would push the optimal portfolio out of alignment.
This more complex tension is visualised in Figure (2) and
we now need to include the role of the global minimum
variance (GMV) portfolio θ0. The inclusion of the global
minimum variance portfolio then introduces a dependency
on the equally-weighted portfolio when correlations are
negligible.
ω1ω2ω3
α
θ∗
θ0θα
φ
Figure 2: Constrained geometry of the α-angle where αare the asset
expected returns, θ∗some optimal portfolio weights, θ0is the Global
Minimum Variance (GMV) portfolio, θαthe optimal risky portfolio,
andφtheα-angle for some choice of the vector between the optimal
portfolio and α. The control space gives a vector ω∈R3, in general
our control space is Rn. Here the gearing constraint θαno longer
aligns in general with αbecause the constraints impose a dependency
on the global minimum variance portfolio θ0.
3. The linear gearing constraint
We now explicitly consider the functional form of the
vector zin the optimal solution θ∗= Σ−1z(and by exten-sionw). Consider the optimisations in Table 1 but now
include the gearing restriction:
1′θ=g0. (19)
Here gearing is used broadly in the sense of the ratio of
exposure of the investment fund relative to the underly-
ing equity. As explained before, we differentiate this from
the concept of leverage, which we use as a measure of the
amount we have borrowed to gain exposure. Practically
we will consider leverage to be measured by ℓ0=1′|θ|.
This is important in order to differentiate the type of con-
straint we will impose in the fund management problems
we consider and the limitations of this. The gearing con-
straint will not in general limit the extent to which bets
are long/short within the fund.
Concretely, we consider four unconstrained optimisa-
tions, those in Table 1, and the four gearing constrained
optimisations as shown in Table 2. We follow the work of
Ingersoll [27] and Merton [41] who investigate and derive
the results of optimal mean variance portfolios in detail.
In our case, we will only need to investigate two portfolio
choice problems in detail. First, that of minimising the
portfolio variance and targeting the return with a gearing
constraint. Second, by finding a mean-variance optimal
portfolio with a risk aversion parameter γwith the same
gearing constraint. Using these solutions we show that
theirα-angles are bounded above (because the cosine is
bounded below) by some function of the condition num-
ber. We then extend the argument made by Golts and
Jones [19] that the dragging optimal bets towards the di-
rection of αis limited by poor conditioning, albeit in a
weakened form. These optimisations are common cause,
but how they are used here is novel.
Optimisation V and VIII in Table 2, respectively the
return maximisation with a linear and quadratic constraint,
and a Sharpe ratio maximisation with a linear leverage
constraint, both trivially have optimal portfolios that are
multiplies of the risky portfolio θα. This means that The-
orem 1 is valid for optimisations I,II,III,VI,V and VIII.
This means that we only need to generalise and weaken
the condition number bound for optimisation VI and VII
(See Figure 4(b)).
3.1. Constrained minimum variance portfolio (VI)
We want to find an investment portfolio with minimum
variance and a targeted return with the additional gearing
constraint, hence we want to solve for:
arg min
θ1
2θ′Σθ
s.t.α′θ=αpand1′θ=g0.(20)
This is optimisation VI in Table 2. This problem can be
reduced to a Lagrangian with two Lagrange multipliers
λ= (λ1, λ2):
L=1
2θ′Σθ−λ′
α′θ−αp
1′θ−g0
. (21)
6Gearing Constrained Portfolio Choice
# Optimisation Constraints
Varg max θ
θ′α	 σ2
p=θ′Σθ≤σ0
1′θ=g0
soln:θ∗
5=g0θα
VIarg min
θ(
1
2θ′Σθ)
αP=α′θ≥α0
1′θ=g0
soln:θ∗
6= (g0−ω)θ0+ωθα, ω=B
D(α0A−g0B)
.
VIIarg max
θ(
θ′α−γ
2θ′Σθ)
1′θ=g0.
soln:θ∗
7= (g0−µ)θ0+µθα, µ=h
1
γBi
VIIIarg max
θ(
θ′α√
θ′Σθ)
1′θ=g0.
soln:θ∗
8=g0θα
Table 2: Four gearing constrained portfolio optimisation problems
that can be extend into the geometric framework of [19] (See Table
1). Here A=1′Σ−11,B=α′Σ−11=1Σ−1α,C=α′Σ−1αand
D=AC−B2. The GMV portfolio is θ0= Σ−11/Aand the optimal
risky portfolio is θα= Σ−1α/B. The subscript ion the solution θ∗
i
is the number of the optimisation in question.
Solving for θin terms of the Lagrange multipliers λfrom
Eqn.(21) by solving the Kuhn-Tucker equations to find:
θ∗
6= Σ−1λ1α+ Σ−1λ21. (22)
Then with some algebra and using the convenient substitu-
tions: A=1′Σ−11,B=α′Σ−11=1Σ−1α,C=α′Σ−1α
andD=AC−B2. Here A is the variance of the global
minimum variance portfolio, B that of the optimal risky
portfolio,√
Cis the Sharpe ratio, and D is positive by
the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality because we have assumed
that Σ is non-singular and all assets do not have the same
means. We can eliminate the two Lagrange multipliers to
find the optimal portfolio control:
θ∗
6=g0
DΣ−1(C1−Bα) +αp
DΣ−1(Aα−B1).(23)
We can define two new portfolios aandb:
θ∗
6=g0a+αpb. (24)
The optimal portfolio control can then be written in the
form of a two fund separation theorem where the portfolios
are weighted by a combination of gearing g0and expected
portfolio return αpweighted portfolios, we might naively
anticipate that fixing the level of returns may fix the gear-
ing if the solution is unique – this is not the case. In the
return maximisation (optimisation VI) when we set the
portfolio variance we will set the gearing because the con-
straint is quadratic. That is no longer the case with risk
minimisation.
To more intuitively understand the portfolio, we can
also split the optimal portfolio into the global minimumvariance portfolios θ0= Σ−11/Aand optimal risk portfo-
liosθα= Σ−1α/B. Arranging terms in Eqn.(23):
θ∗
6= (g0C−αpB)A
Dθ0+ (αpA−g0B)B
Dθα. (25)
This is convenient because we know that 1′(θ0+θα) =
0,1′θ0= 1, and that 1′θα= 1. The combination is a
cash neutral portfolio whose weights sum to zero, and the
individual portfolios are fully invested. We can factor out
the geared global minimum risk portfolio to find
θ∗
6=g0θ0+B
D(g0B−αpA)
(θ0−θα). (26)
We see that the resulting portfolio is a combination of a
leveraged global minimum risk portfolio and a geared cash
neutral portfolio. With some weight ω=B
D(g0B−αpA)
this can be written as: θ∗= (g0−ω)θ0+ωθα. This is the
form we will use more generally as in optimisation VI in
Table 2.
If we set the level of returns we notice that this has no
effect on the overall gearing of the portfolio as long as it
is part of the set of feasible solutions. It will just change
our exposure to the cash neutral portfolio. This does not
imply that the leverage |θ|is fixed as this changes with
the portfolio return target changes, even for a set level of
gearing, because our long/short bets in the cash neutral
portfolio will then change. However, there is a minimum
return associated with the set of global minimum variance
portfolios generated by the different levels of gearing.
The minimum-variance set can be found using σ2
p=
θ∗′Σθ∗and Eqn.(22):
σ2
p=λ1θ6∗′α+λ2θ6∗′1=λ1αp+λ2g0. (27)
Or equivalently from Eqn.(24):
σ2
p=1
D 
α2
pA−2g0αpB+g2
0C
. (28)
We can find the set of global minimum variance portfolios
with gearing.
First, find the expected return at the inflection point
where the minimum variance portfolio is found:
∂σ2
p
∂αp=1
D(2αpA−2g0B) = 0 . (29)
Then find the target return αpin terms of the gearing,
asset returns and asset covariance:
αp=g0B
A. (30)
We can substitute this into Eqn.(25) to then verify that
this in fact just the geared global minimum variance port-
folio:
θ∗
6=g0θ0, (31)
7Eqn.(30) can also be used to eliminate the return target
from Eqn. (28) to find the variance at the point of global
minimum variance with gearing: σ2
p=g2
0/A.
We would like to now consider how the lower bound in
Theorem 1 is weakened. Rewrite Eqn.(23):
θ∗
6= Σ−1
(g0C−αpB)1
D1+ (αpA−g0B)1
Dα
.(32)
This can be written in the form of θ∗∝Σ−1zwhere z
represents any vector of the same dimension as α:
z= (g0C−αpB)1
D1+ (αpA−g0B)1
Dα.(33)
Herezis the same dimension as α. By Theorem 2 we then
know the angle between this portfolio and the αportfolio
has an upper bound dependent on the condition number of
the estimated covariance matrix. It is still advantageous
to tilt the gearing constrained optimal portfolio towards
αby improving the conditioning of the covariance matrix
while maintaining the constraint.
With the choice of Eqn.(30) we trivially have that z=
1. This would fix the angle between αand the optimal
portfolio. This means that the constraint will fix the tilt
of the optimal portfolio relative to the αwhen selecting
for the global minimum variance portfolio on the efficient
frontier. This means that we cannot naively tilt the op-
timal portfolio towards αif we have any form of gearing
because this would break the constraint. We can however
tilt the risky optimal portfolio towards α.
3.2. Constrained mean-variance optimal portfolio (VII)
We now consider the relationship between the gearing
constrained minimum risk portfolio from Eqn.(20) and the
gearing constrained mean-variance optimal portfolio:
argmaxθ(
θ′α−γ
2θ′Σθ)
s.t1′θ=g0. (34)
This is optimisation VII in Table 2. The optimal control
can be found by solving the Kuhn-Tucker equations to find
the mean-variance optimal portfolios, Eqn.(23):
θ∗
7=
g0−1
γ1′Σ−1αΣ−11
1′Σ−11+1
γΣ−1α.
using A=1′Σ−11andB=α′Σ−11=1′Σ−1αwe find
θ∗
7=
g0−1
γBΣ−11
A+1
γΣ−1α. (35)
The global minimum variance portfolio is θ0= Σ−11/A.
The sum of its weights are unity: 1′θ0= 1. The optimal
portfolio can be written as the weighted sum of the GMV
portfolio and the risky αportfolio θα= Σ−1α/B:
θ∗
7=
g0−1
γB
θ0+1
γB
θα. (36)Here with µ=1/γBwe have: θ7∗= (g0−µ)θ0+µθα.
We find that θ∗
7=g0θ0−µ(θ0−θα), which is a combi-
nation of the global minimum risk portfolio and an optimal
risky cash neutral long/short portfolio: 1′(θ0−θα) = 0.
We can factor out the global minimum variance portfolio
θ0in Eqn.(35) and with a bit of matrix algebra we see that
the portfolio is made of a geared global minimum variance
portfolio, whose weights sum to one, and a risky portfolio
which is dependent on the return expectations and risk
aversion [39] but can have gearing:
θ∗
7=
g0+1
γΣ−1(α1′−1α′)
θ0. (37)
By considering the i-th and j-th components on the inner
bracket in the matrix product in the second term, it can be
seen to be driven by the pairs of relative α: (α1′−1α′)ij=
αi−αjwhere diag( α1′−1α′) = 0. The first term on the
left in the bracket is the geared global minimum variance
portfolio where, the weights of the GMV portfolio sum to
one, but is now multiplied by the gearing parameter g0.
The second term is a portfolio whose weights sum to zero,
but it is leveraged by risk aversion and then projected onto
the global minimum risk portfolio. The risky portfolio is
independent of the gearing parameter g0.
We can contrast Eqn.(36) with Eqn.(26); and set g0= 1
to find that θ∗
6=θ0for the risk minimisation. We see
that with g0= 1 we have recovered the Global Minimum
Variance (GMV) portfolio θ0; as in Eqn.(37) when we let
the risk aversion become sufficiently large. Both portfo-
lio optimisations have the same minimum variance port-
folio, as expected following from a two fund separation,
and the minimum variance portfolio are combined with a
risky portfolio. This is contrasted with the unconstrained
optimisations given in Table (1) which are all leveraged
versions of the optimal risky portfolio θα.
Finally, we have that from Eqn.(36) that the optimal
portfolio is not generally aligned with θαand hence we
cannot explain the lower bound deviation from alignment
withαbeing due to the condition number. However, we
can show that there is a weakened condition number lower
bound. Eqn.(35) can be written in the form of Σ−1w
θ∗
7=1
γΣ−1wwhere w=
g0−1
γB1
A+1
γα
,(38)
where wis the same dimension as α. By Theorem 2,
as for the risk minimisation with a gearing constraint in
Eqn.(26), we again know that the angle between this port-
folio and the αportfolio has a upper bound dependent on
the condition number of the estimated covariance matrix.
It is still advantageous to tilt the gearing constrained op-
timal risky portfolio within the overall optimal portfolio
towards αby improving the conditioning of the covari-
ance matrix, while maintaining the constraint. However,
in this instance the gearing can saturate any information
advantage as the gearing can drag the portfolio away from
the direction of αtowards the global minimum variance
8portfolio, even if in the risky portfolio, the angle can be
reduced by improving the conditioning.
3.3. Geometric interpretation
The key geometric insight of [19] is to consider the
expected portfolio return as a function of the angle φ:
αP=α′θ=|α||θ|cosφ. This splits the problem into
a direction and magnitude and shows that to ameliorate
the impact of poor covariance conditioning it is sufficient
to constrain the angle φ. Here the investment “direction”
is given by the unit vector ˆθ=θ/|θ|associated with the
optimal portfolio weight in the portfolio weight space –
which will be some simplex. This is visualised in Figure 1
for the optimisations I, II, III, IV, V and VIII. The gearing
constrained optimisations are visualised in Figure 2. The
investment “magnitude” is given by the |θ|.
The expected portfolio return can be re-written using
either of the portfolio solutions (either Σ−1zfrom Eqn.
(26) or Σ−1wfrom Eqn. (36)). Both are of the form:
g0θ0−w(θ0−θα), for some weight w∈[µ, ω]:αP=
α′θ= (g0−w)α′θ0+wα′θα. This has two angles, the
first between αand the global minimum variance portfo-
lio, some angle φ0, and the second between the optimal
risk portfolio and α,φ1. The overall α-angle φcan be
decomposed into these two angles:
cos(φ) = (g0−w)|θ0|
|θ|cosφ0+w|θα|
|θ|cosφ1. (39)
If we improve the conditioning of the covariance matrix we
would be able to reduce the upper bound on the second
angle φ1(by definition ϕ), the angle between the optimal
risky portfolio and α. This would in turn reduce the over-
all angle between the optimal portfolio and the direction
ofα. However, improving the conditioning of the covari-
ance matrix does not mean the φ0will lead to the overall
portfolio being closer to α. It may well drag the optimal
portfolio away from the expected αbecause it could move
the minimum variance portfolio away from the expected
returns. This suggests that one should really be minimis-
ingφ1i.e.minimise the angle between the optimal risky
portfolio and α(the unconstrained portfolio optimisation),
rather than the overall αangle itself (the full constrained
portfolio optimisation).
From the first order conditions1and Eqn. (39) :
∂φ0
∂φ1=−w
(g0−w)sinφ1
sinφ0|θα|
|θ0|. (40)
Minimising with respect to the overall angle φis equivalent
to minimising with respect to φ1because from Eqn.(39)
and integrating Eqn.(40) where there is some well behaved
function fsuch that φ0=f(φ1) on φ1∈[0, π/2]. If
we minimise the α-angle φwe would have minimised φ1
(equivalently ϕ), the angle between the optimal risky port-
folioθαand the direction of the expected returns α. It is
1∂φcosφ= 0sufficient to minimise the angle between the optimal risky
portfolio and the direction of the expected returns φ1=ϕ
in order that the overall α-angle is minimised in order to
achieve optimal outcomes even in the presence of the gear-
ing constraint. We now consider precisely how to achieve
such an optimal outcome when there is estimation uncer-
tainty without making strong distributional assumptions.
4. Robust portfolio optimisations
4.1. Constraining the α-angle
Golts and Jones [19] argue that the mean-variance opti-
misations can be made robust by constraining the α-angle.
They considered an uncertainty region Uαas a ball centred
onαwith radius:
rα=k|α|fork∈(0,1). (41)
This is some 1- σneighbourhood. The expected portfolio
return in this neighbourhood is: αp=θ′α, and the ex-
pected return of the optimal risky portfolio in the same
neighbourhood is: αr=θ′
αα. In the unconstrained cases
given in Table 1 the robust expected returns of the optimal
risky portfolios
min
Uααr=θ′
αα−k|α||θα|, (42)
are equivalent to the robust expected returns of the opti-
mal portfolio [19]:
min
Uααp=θ′α−k|α||θ|. (43)
Here αp=αr. This is not in general the case in the
presence of the gearing constraint, in particular for opti-
misations VI and VII in Table 2, because θα̸=θ∗and
hence αr̸=αp.
Our objective is to minimise the angle between the op-
timal risky portfolio and the expected return in the case
of the gearing constraint in order to ameliorate the im-
pact of poor conditioning of the covariance, however, this
is equivalent to minimising the overall angle between the
optimal portfolio and the expected returns – see Eqn.(39).
This implies that from expected portfolio return we can
minimise this over the α-weight angle φ:
min
Uααp=|θ||α|(cos(φ)−k) for k∈(0,1). (44)
The optimizations now include the expected returns but
with a regularisation term.
In practice this can be achieved by minimising the an-
gle between the optimal risky portfolio θαand the ex-
pected returns αby shrinking the covariance matrix be-
cause the difference in the direction of the optimal risky
portfolio and αis entirely due to the covariance Σ: θα∝
Σ−1α. Hence we try find some new covariance ˜Σ that will
approximate the required α-angle minimisation. This now
links the method of [19] to conventional shrinkage methods
9that focus entirely, and exclusively, on the conditioning of
the covariance matrix.
The reformulated portfolio optimizations are then as
in Table (3). What is important to realise is that the
less one trusts the expected asset returns αthe larger we
make the regularisation hyper-parameter k. This ensures
that the less certain we are about the asset returns, the
closer to the expect returns the risky portfolio will be,
and in turn the closer our portfolio will be – this ensures
that we do not excessively leverage the errors in the ex-
pected asset returns. The key difference in the presence of
the constraint is that we will optimally mix in the equally
weighted portfolio so that the overall optimal portfolio is
not always aligned with the optimal risky portfolio.
α-angle Robust Portfolio Choice
# Optimisation Constraints
I, V arg max
θ
min
Uααp
σ2
p=θ′Σθ≤σ2
0
II arg min
θ1
2θ′Σθ
min
Uααp=θ′α≥α0
III arg max
θ
min
Uααp−γ
2θ′Σθ
IV,VIII arg max
θ(min
Uααp
θ′Σθ)
VI arg min
θ(
1
2θ′Σθ)
min
Uααp=α′θ≥α0
1′θ=g0
VII arg max
θ(
min
Uααp−γ
2θ′Σθ)
1′θ=g0
Table 3: Two linearly constrained portfolio optimisation problems,
VI and VII, can then be extend into the robust geometric framework
of [19] (See Table 1) by including a minimisation over the ball Uα
defined in Eqn.(44). Optimization V from Table 2 is equivalent to
optimization I because fixing σpfixes the gearing g0. Optimization
IV is equivalent to VIII where the solution of IV is scaled by g0.
4.2. Shrinking with the α-angle
Estimating covariance matrices of stock returns has al-
ways been a problematic area. The sample covariance un-
fortunately creates a well documented problem, where if
the number of stocks under consideration are large, partic-
ularly relative to the number of observations, the sample
covariance matrix contains a lot of error [29]. The most
extreme coefficients in the matrix tend to take on extreme
values not because they are correct, but because they con-
tain an extreme amount of error. This also implies that the
condition number of covariance matrices tend to be large,
and very sensitive to the input data. Covariance shrink-
age can ameliorate this, as shown by Ledoit and Wolf [34].
Here we argue that the shrinkage itself should be consid-
ered in the context of the optimisation constraints.
Following [19] one can consider a shrunk covariance for
a portfolio with nassets. For example, we can considerthe Sharpe ratio maximization solution, optimization IV,
but with a new covariance where k∈[0,1]:
˜Σ =k|α||θ|√
θ′ΣθI+α′θ−k|α||θ|√
θ′Σθ
Σ. (45)
Here Σ is the original estimated covariance matrix, Iis the
identity matrix, θ,αandkare as before. When kis zero
we recover the optimal risky portfolio θα= Σ−1α/Bby
solving: θ=˜Σ−1αto recover the Sharpe ratio maximisa-
tion solution of the optimal portfolio θ∗for optimization
IV. This is just the optimal risky portfolio θα. This con-
struction is valid for optimisations I, II, III, VI, V and VIII
as these are all scalar multiples of Sharpe ratio maximisa-
tion optimal risky portfolio.
We can eliminate a direct dependency on the optimal
portfolio returns and risk and set the optimal risky port-
folio to be fully invested ( g0= 1), so that from Eqn.(45)
with k∈[0,cosφ] and using that α′θ=|α||θ|cos(φ) we
can pick a covariance that updates the optimal solution
directly to find ˜θα=˜Σ−1α/˜Bwhere:
˜Σ =k
cosφI+
1−k
cosφ
Σ. (46)
Here kcan be understood as some quantity cos( φk) for
some targeted optimal angle φk∈[φ, π/ 2] between the
risky portfolio and the expected returns. When Σ →I
will recover the same limiting solution as k→cosφand
align the optimal portfolio with the direction of the ex-
pected returns: ˆα. Any of the unconstrained optimal
portfolio solutions can be modified in this way using an
appropriate chosen covariance that would shrink the co-
variance towards the identity matrix so that the portfolio
can be shifted between the original solution and a regu-
larised one. This is equivalent to conventional covariance
shrinkage methods.
We can now extend this to find a new regularised co-
variance given a prudent choice of kfrom Eqn.(46) for
any of the gearing constrained optimisations. We com-
pute a new global minimum variance portfolio ˜θ0and a
new optimal risky portfolio ˜θαwith k∈[0,cosφ]. Then,
we combined these to form a new efficient frontier exploit-
ing the two fund separation theorems. This ensures that
we have retained consistency with the constraints, while
minimising the α-angle as in Eqn.(44). Optimisations VI
and VII are combinations of the GMV portfolio and the
optimal risky portfolio. The overall portfolio is built up
of the combination of two portfolios: one with direction
˜Σ−11, and the other with the direction of ˜Σ−1α. When
one is less certain about the asset returns αthen the regu-
larisation parameter kis chosen to be larger. The choice of
any hyper-parameter such as the regularisation parameter
requires some sort of cross-validation. Hence in practice
it should be expected that one would need to engage in
simulation work to best decided on the value of k in a way
that was not overly prone to backtest over-fitting [3].
In the presence of the gearing constraint, the greater
k, the more exposed we are to the 1 /nportfolio factored
10from the GMV portfolio. This is because when kincreases
towards k0= cos φwe will shrink the covariance towards
the identity matrix In. This will shrink the GMV portfolio
towards the equally weighted 1 /nportfolio given by a unit
vector ˆe:
˜θ0=˜Σ−11
1′˜Σ−11k→k0− − − − →1
1′In1=1
n=ˆe. (47)
Here ˆe′1= 1, where 1′1=n. The risky portfolio becomes
the weighted average of the expected returns which is just
the unit vector in the direction of α:
˜θα=˜Σ−1α
1′˜Σ−1αk→k0− − − − →Inα
1′Inα=α
α′1=ˆα. (48)
Here ˆα′1= 1 and α′1=n¯α=|α|for the average alpha
¯α. The combination of the GMV portfolio, ˜θ0, and the
optimal risky portfolio, ˜θα, is controlled by the amount
of gearing g0, as seen in equations (26) and (36). The
combination remains cash neutral: 1′(˜θ0−˜θα) = 0.
For the gearing constrained mean-variance optimisa-
tion given by Eqn.(36) and using covariance shrinkage to-
wards the identity matrix will have ˜A=nand ˜B=α′1
to find from Eqn.(37):
˜θ∗
6=g0ˆe+1
γIn(α1′−1α′)ˆe. (49)
The average expected return is: ¯ α=1
nα′1and this can
be used to find:
˜θ∗
6=g0ˆe+1
γ(α−1¯α). (50)
We can confirm this by checking that the last term cor-
rectly sums to zero when multiplied by 1′. From the unit
vector in the direction of α:|α|=n¯αwhere α=|α|ˆα
and using this we can write Eqn.(50) as:
˜θ∗
6=g0ˆe+|α|
γ(ˆα−ˆe). (51)
This is geometrically intuitive because we see that when
theαdirection ˆαaligns with the equally weighted portfo-
lioˆethen our best case optimal portfolio is just the geared
GMV and independent of αbecause of the constraint.
For the case of the risk minimisation the αstandard
deviation will be required: n2σ2
α=nα′α−(α′1)2. From
Eqn.(26) again with ˜A=n,˜B=α′1,˜C=α′αand ˜D=
nα′α−(α′1)2. We can identify ˜Dwith the αvariance:
˜D=n2σ2
α. For optimization VII:
˜θ∗
7=g0ˆe+ ˜ω(ˆα−ˆe). (52)
Here the weight is: ˜ ω= (g0(α′1)2−nα0(α′1))/˜D. Putting
this all together we find that the maximally shrunk optimal
risk minimisation with gearing constraint is:
˜θ∗
7=g0ˆe+g0(α′1)2−nα0(α′1)
nα′α−(α′1)2
(ˆα−ˆe). (53)This can then be written as:
˜θ∗
7=g0ˆe+1
σ2α
g0(α′ˆe)2−α0(α′ˆe)
(ˆα−ˆe). (54)
From the definition of the average expected returns:
˜θ∗
7=g0ˆe+1
σ2α 
g0¯α2−α0¯α
(ˆα−ˆe). (55)
When the αaligns with the equally weighted portfolio we
find the best case portfolio is once again the geared equally
weighted portfolio: g0ˆe. When the αis orthogonal to
the equally weight portfolio α′ˆe= 0 we again find some
combination.
In the unconstrained optimisation the risky portfolio is
shrunk towards the asset views α; this is no longer the case
in the presence of gearing. There will be a combination of
an equally weighted portfolio and α. However, the gearing
contributions can be conveniently factored out and treated
separately relative to the unconstrained solution.
ω1ω2ω3αθα
˜θ∗
θ∗
θ0ˆeφk→k0
k→k0k→k0
Figure 3: The stylised geometry of the robust portfolio construction
for optimisations VI and VII. Here ˆeis the unit vector ˆe′1= 1 and
ˆαis the direction of the expected returns. The equally weighted
portfolio is given by ˆe. With the shrinkage of the covariance, Σ →˜Σ
ask→k0, the optimal portfolio θ∗is rotated to ˜θ∗. For optimisa-
tions VI and VII this will be some linear combination of ˆαandˆe.
The optimal risky portfolio θαis rotated towards α, and the global
minimum variance portfolio is rotated towards ˆe. Optimisations I,
II, III, IV, V and VIII rotate towards α.
5. Simulated Portfolios
5.1. Simulated Pareto surfaces
The efficient frontiers for the different optimisations are
shown in Figure 4. Optimisations I, II, III and VI from Ta-
ble 1 are shown in Figure 4(a). These are implicitly geared
versions of the fully invested optimal risky portfolio and
hence generate a straight line in the ( αp, σp) space that
can be identified as the Capital Market Line (CML) asso-
ciated with a 0% risk-free rate. The fully invested version
of optimisations VI and VII from Table 2 are shown along
11with the GMV portfolio. Figure 4(b) depicts a stylised
version of optimisations V, VI, VII and VIII from Table
2. Optimisations V and VIII generate the Capital Mar-
ket surface (the grey plane) which intersects the solutions
to optimisations VI and VII (the green curved surface)
along the line representing the family of geared optimal
risky portfolios (the red line). The family of geared global
minimum risk portfolios is also shown (the blue line). The
figures are indicative and demonstrate the well known gen-
eral geometry of the fully invested portfolio optimisation
Pareto surfaces. Figure 4(a) is the slice at g0= 1 from the
surface shown in Figure 4(b).
5.2. Simulated α-angle dependency
The equally-weighted portfolio has been a benchmark
in the portfolio selection literature and we consider what
theα-weight angle of equally-weighted portfolios are com-
pared to those of portfolios resulting from mean variance
optimisation. Here we demonstrate the relative perfor-
mance relation between the equally weighted portfolio and
the mean variance optimal portfolio via direct simulation.
This relationship was investigated by simulating 10 years
worth of monthly stock returns, for 10 stock portfolios,
from normal distributions with random mean (between 0%
and 50% p.a) and random standard deviation (between 0%
and 20% p.a.) with 1000 replications per simulation.
First, the α-weight angle for the equally weighted port-
folio was compared to the α-weight angle of the optimal
risk portfolio ( θα) on every simulation. Since all uncon-
strained mean variance optimisation results (see Table 1)
and solutions V and VIII of the constrained mean vari-
ance optimisation results (see Table 2) are geared versions
of the optimal risky portfolio, it is appropriate that the
Golts and Jones [19] conditioned matrix was applied to
this solution (See Figure 5(a)).
Unconstrained simulations without the use of covari-
ance shrinkage show that only 3.8% of optimal risky port-
folios simulations had better (lower) α-weight angles than
the equally weighted portfolios, and were on average 27.5◦
worse than the equally weighted portfolio α-weight an-
gles. This demonstrate that the naive treatment results
in equally-weighted portfolios, on average, out perform-
ing the mean-variance optimal portfolios. This confirms
the distribution free perspective presented above, that the
out performance of equally weighted benchmarks in sim-
ulations is due to selecting sub-optimal optimisation out-
comes under estimation uncertainty.
Second, when considering the α-weight angle of con-
strained mean variance optimisation solutions VI and VII
of Table 2 compared to that of equally weighted portfo-
lios, only 3.4% and 3.2% of optimal risky portfolios simu-
lations had better (lower) α-weight angles than the equally
weighted portfolios for solutions VI and VII respectively.
Additionally, the α-weight angles were both 27.6◦worse
than the equally weighted portfolio’s α-weight angle re-
spectively. Again, confirming the result that naive sim-ulations would suggest that equally weighted portfolio’s
would outperform the mean variance portfolio’s.
Finally, simulations were then repeated to assess whether
the covariance shrinkage methodology proposed by Golts
and Jones [19] for the optimal risky portfolio ( θα) allows
for consistently smaller α-weight angles than those pro-
duced by equally-weighted portfolios, in a normally dis-
tributed environment, and in the presence of constraints.
When considering constrained mean variance solutions VI
and VII of Table 2, which are not simply geared versions of
the optimal risky portfolio θα(Figure 5(a)) because of the
linear constraints, similar results can be seen; these are ev-
ident in Figure 5(b) below. As soon as some conditioning
is introduced, 100% of simulations show better α-weight
angles than those produced by the equally weighted port-
folios. This implies that 100% of the simulations show
improved covariance matrix conditioning, given the fact
that the the matrix condition number provides an upper
bound to the α-weight angle (see equations 12 and 18).
This confirms the theoretical implications, that only
the correct formulation of conditioning creates appropri-
ate optimal outcomes under linearly constrained quadratic
optimisation. That the equally weighted portfolio, in the
distribution free setting, are typically sub-optimal rela-
tive to the α-angle shrunk covariances, and that this has
been confirmed under simulation for the case of normal
distributed returns.
5.3. Simulated Portfolio Results
Various alternatives for shrinkage estimates are avail-
able, and this section intends to briefly introduce the bene-
fits of the Golts and Jones [19] methodology, through real
data simulations. We make use of monthly total return
data from all stocks included in the FTSE/JSE All Share
Index from January 1996 to August 2016. This includes
332 stocks, all with varying times of listing/de-listing. A
set of 1000 simulations is performed. Each simulation fol-
lows the steps outlined in Table 4.
An important adjustment to note is that alpha-weight
angles can be greater than 90 degrees (between 90 and 180
degrees) in real world data. This infrequently occurs when
there are large negative expected return vectors, or large
negative correlations. The Golts and Jones [19] method-
ology does not make provision for this and is addressed in
the simulations by applying a cap on the alpha-weight an-
gles. This means that any alpha-weight angle greater than
90 degrees, is set to the maximum value of 90 degrees.
Seven well known shrinkage methodologies are tested
in this simulation. The range of shrinkage methods in the
literature is significant, and this list is by no means ex-
haustive. For this reason we refer the interested reader
to one of the many review papers given in the introduc-
tion. In terms of indicative methods we focus on those
given by Ledoit [35] and Ledoit and Wolf [36, 38]. This
is because we are just trying to show from this sample,
the competitive nature of our proposed methodology and
12(a) No explicit gearing constraint with g0= 1
 (b) Gearing constrained g0∈(0.5,1.5)
Figure 4: Fig (a) is the Pareto frontier sliced from Fig (b) at g0= 1. This visualises and compare the stylised Pareto (efficient) frontiers
for the optimizations problems I, II, III and VI from Table 1 with those that have explicit gearing constraints: optimisations V, VI, VII and
VIII from Table 2. Optimisations I,II, III and IV are portfolios that generate a Capital Market Line (CML) as they can be considered linear
combinations of some risk-less portfolio 0and the optimal risky portfolio θα.
(a) Unconstrained performance (I)
 (b) Constrained performance (VI & VII)
Figure 5: Both figures show the percentage number nϕω∗<ϕ1/Nof performance simulations with weights better aligned with those of the
returns (in circles against the left axis), and the average difference (in triangles against the right axis) between the conditioned angles and
the unconditioned angles µ∆ϕk=Em[ϕk−ϕ0] with confidence intervals. Fig. 5(a) is for the unconstrained optimisations, and Fig. 5(b) for
the constrained cases (VI and VII). Each point represents m= 1000 replications. This shows the unconditioned optimisations ( k=0) relative
to those with Golts and Jones [19] covariance conditioning ( k > 0). 100% of the simulations show smaller α-weight angles for k > 10−1
on the resulting optimal risk portfolios relative to the the equally weighted portfolio. On average, this angle is just under 30◦better. [19]
conditioned optimal portfolios outperform the equally weighted portfolios.
when we believe it should be used. The seven different
methodologies we consider are given in Table 5.
Figure 6 provides the simulation results for the uncon-
strained solutions (Table 1). This includes the constrainedsolutions (V and VIII from Table 2) which are simply
geared versions of each other. The results are shown across
1000 simulations, for varying k, for each shrinkage method-
ology. This figure shows the average out-of-sample Sharpe
13(a) Sharpe Ratio
 (b) Probabilistic Sharpe Ratio
(c) Average α-weight angle
 (d) Condition Number improvement
Figure 6: The historic simulations results for the unconstrained solutions (Table 1). Fig. 6a shows the average out-of-sample Sharpe ratios,
Fig. 6b shows the average out-of-sample probabilistic Sharpe ratio’s, Fig. 6c shows the average α-weight angle, and Fig. 6d shows the average
percentage improvement of the condition number of the covariance matrix; all across 1000 simulations, for varying k, for each shrinkage
methodology given in Table 5. The G&J appears to deliver returns most aligned to future asset returns, generates higher Sharpe ratios, at
high confidence levels, and improves the condition number of the covariance matrices significantly.
ratios (Figure 6a), the average out-of-sample probabilis-
tic Sharpe ratio’s (Figure 6b), the average α-weight an-
gle (Figure 6c) and the average percentage improvement
of the condition number of the covariance matrix (Figure
6d). Here the α-weight angle is the angle between the
”shrunk” weights and the forward looking returns, show-
ing which methodology will deliver performance most in
line with future returns. G&J appears to deliver returns
most aligned to future asset returns. We see that the G&J
methodology generates higher Sharpe ratios, at high con-
fidence levels, especially around smaller kestimates, and
the G&J methodology improves the condition number of
the covariance matrices significantly.
Figure 7 shows the simulations results for the con-
strained solution VI from Table 2. The figure shows the
average out-of-sample Sharpe ratios (Figure 7a), the aver-
age out-of-sample probabilistic Sharpe ratios (Figure 7b),the average α-weight angle (Figure7c) and the average per-
centage improvement of the condition number of the co-
variance matrix (Figure 7d) across 1000 simulations, for
varying k, for each shrinkage methodology. We see that
the G&J methodology does not tend to generate higher
sharpe ratios using solution VI. Again, we note that the α-
weight angle is the angle between the“shrunk” weights and
the forward looking returns, showing which methodology
will deliver performance most in line with future returns.
While the α-weight angle does decrease very slightly, the
G&J methodology does not appear to be most favourable
in this regard.
Figure 8 demonstrates the simulation results for the
constrained solution VII from Table 2. Here the aver-
age out-of-sample sharpe ratios are in Figure 8a, the av-
erage out-of-sample probabilistic Sharpe ratios in Figure
8b, the average α-weight angle in Figure 8c, and the aver-
14(a) Sharpe Ratio
 (b) Probabilistic Sharpe Ratio
(c) Average α-weight angle
 (d) Condition Number improvement
Figure 7: The historic simulation results for the constrained solution VI (Table 2) are shown. Fig.7a shows the average out-of-sample Sharpe
ratios, Fig. 7b shows the average out-of-sample probabilistic Sharpe ratios, Fig. 7c shows the average α-weight angle, and Fig. 7d shows
the average percentage improvement of the condition number of the covariance matrix; again across 1000 simulations, for varying k, for each
shrinkage methodology given in Table 5. While G&J methodology improves the condition number of the covariance matrices, and see’s strong
α-weight angles at small k, the methodology does not appear superior under this solution.
age percentage improvement of the condition number of
the covariance matrix is given in Figure 8d. The his-
toric simulations are across 1000 simulations following the
methodology outlined in Table 4, for varying k, and for
each shrinkage methodology from Table 5. We see that
the G&J methodology generates higher Sharpe ratios, at
high confidence levels, especially around smaller kesti-
mates. Again, we can see which methodology will deliver
performance most in line with future returns because the
α-weight angle is the angle between the “shrunk” weights
and the forward looking returns. The G&J method ap-
pears to deliver returns most aligned to future asset re-
turns, and improves the condition number of the covari-
ance matrices significantly.
In summary, what one can conclude from the simula-
tions shown in figures 6, 7 and 8, is that under uncon-
strained solutions and constrained solutions V, VII andVIII the Golts and Jones [19] method appears superior in
delivering portfolios that are better aligned to the returns
of the assets, and generating out-of-sample performance
with superior Sharpe ratios.
However, under constrained Solution VI, this does not
appear to be the case. Solution VI implements a minimum
return threshold, and solutions naturally tend to solve
for weights that generate that minimum return exactly.
This means that all solutions are solving for the same re-
turn, and improved Sharpe ratio’s are only being generated
from the standard deviation, which the G&J methodol-
ogy does not necessarily solve for. Moving the portfolio
weights closer to the expected return vector (shrinking the
α-weight angle) is not beneficial when the return benefit
is not there.
Importantly, we tested this methodology naively using
historical return means as the expected return vectors, and
15(a) Sharpe Ratio
 (b) Probabilistic Sharpe Ratio
(c) Average α-weight angle
 (d) Condition Number improvement
Figure 8: The historic simulation results for the constrained solution VII (Table 2) are shown. Fig . 8a shows the average out-of-sample Sharpe
ratios, Fig. 8b the average out-of-sample probabilistic Sharpe ratios across 1000 simulations, for varying k, for each shrinkage methodology,
Fig. 8c the average α-weight angle, and Fig. 8d shows the average percentage improvement of the condition number of the covariance matrix
across 1000 simulations, for varying k, for each shrinkage methodology given in Table 5. G&J appears to deliver returns most aligned to
future asset returns,generates higher Sharpe ratios, at high confidence levels, and improves the condition number of the covariance matrices
significantly.
even with this large degree of naivety around the future as-
set returns, this methodology returns weights more closely
resembling future asset returns. So while using historical
returns is a reasonable enough forward estimate for future
returns to make this method beneficial in practice, when
managers have more insight, even intermittently, into fu-
ture expected returns, it is clear that this methodology
will be even more useful.
6. Conclusions
Mean-variance portfolio decisions that combine pre-
diction and optimisation have been shown to have poor
empirical performance for a variety of shrinkage predic-
tors under different distributional assumptions that com-
bined mean-variance optimisation with reasonable depar-tures from Gaussianity [44]. Here we directly consider
both constrained and unconstrained mean-variance portfo-
lio construction and performance in a general setting that
does not have strong distributional assumptions and we
then confirm these theoretical results using a simple Gaus-
sian simulation. This is made possible by casting mean-
variance portfolio theory into a geometric setting.
To present the geometric perspective we consider the
upper bound of the α-weight angle as introduced by Golts
and Jones [19]. First, we show how this result arises as
a result of the Kantorovich inequality in Theorem 1. De-
spite being framed in the mean-variance setting the α-
angle approach to covariance shrinkage makes no distribu-
tional assumptions about the data generating processes.
Golts and Jones [19] only considered unconstrained op-
timisation problems when demonstrating the relationship
16α-Angle Simulation Methodology
Description
1. Start date : A random start date is selected and all stocks
with a 10 year history following this date are noted.
2. Investment universe ; 10 stocks are randomly selected from
the full set of stocks in the randomly selected 10 year window.
These form the data for this simulation (120 x 10 data frame)
3. Simulation data window : The first five years of the data is
used in the simulation to find the sample covariance matrix. The
shrunk covariance matrix of each shrinkage methodology is then
computed at each shrinkage intensity ( kbetween 0 and 1, in in-
crements of 0.01). This five year history is also used to calculated
the expected return vector, by merely using the historical mean.
4. Calculate θα: The optimal risk portfolio weights are found
for each of the shrinkage methodologies, for varying k.
5. Calculate the α-weight angle : This is found for the varying
shrinkage methodologies, to see how aligned the portfolio weights
are to the forward returns. The forward returns is the perfor-
mance of those assets in 2 months time.
6. Out-of-sample Performance : The out-of-sample portfo-
lio performance of the Optimal Risky portfolio, for each of the
shrinkage methods, at varying shrinkage intensity ( κ) is calcu-
lated. This is performed by multiplying the optimiser weights
(which uses the various covariance matrices as inputs), with the
performance of each asset in 2 months time. From this perfor-
mance, we find the out-of-sample Sharpe ratio (SR), and a prob-
abilistic Sharpe ratio (PSR) (see de Prado and Bailey [45]).
7. Step forward : We then roll the five year period forward one
month, until 5 years (minus 1 month) of out-of-sample perfor-
mance is calculated, for each of the shrinkage methodologies, at
varying k.
Table 4: Simulation steps for the demonstration of the out-of-sample
behaviour of the different shrinkage methods and their impact on the
α-weight angle. In step 5, we delay the implementation by one month
and are not using the asset’s direct price 1 month later, or the return
over the following months performance, because this would not be
practically possible for managers to implement from a timing per-
spective. For practical relevance a month is skipped to allow for the
real world mechanics of fund management implementation. It would
be equivalent to introducing a look-a-head bias in the simulation.
In addition, we note that in step 6, the probabilistic Sharpe ratio is
included because it provides us with a confidence level of a particular
Sharpe ratio
between the α-weight angle and the condition of the co-
variance matrix; as in optimisations I, II, III and IV in
Table 1. Then, we show that this result can be weakened
and generalised when gearing constraints are added; as in
the optimisations V, VI, VII and VIII in Table 2 using the
extension of Bauer and Householder given by Theorem 2.
When looking at the results of various forms of mean
variance optimisation problems, we note that results of the
unconstrained optimisations: I,II, III and IV, can simply
be thought of as portfolios combined with a risk-less port-
folio and hence generate Pareto surfaces equivalent to the
Capital Market Line with a risk fee rate set to 0%. In-
terestingly, these optimisations (I, II, III and IV) all have
implicit gearing, as imposed by the choice of α0,σ0and
γ, despite that there is no outright, or explicit gearing
constraint.
We see that optimisation V is equivalent to I because
the choice of gearing, g0, is equivalent to a choice of port-Selected Shrinkage Methodologies Considered
Acr. Description
Diag. Diagonal Matrix : Shrinkage moves away from the sam-
ple covariance matrix toward the diagonal covariance ma-
trix, diagΣ, at intensity k:˜Σ = (1 −k)Σ + kdiagΣ. The
diagonal covariance matrix diagΣ is one where the diago-
nal of the sample covariance matrix is preserved, but the
off-diagonal terms are all set to zero [35] (Appendix B2).
CCM Constant Correlation Matrix : Shrinkage moves away
from the sample covariance matrix toward the con-
stant correlation covariance matrix, ΣCCM, at inten-
sity k:˜Σ = (1 −k)Σ + kΣCCM. Here ΣCCM
the diagonal of the sample covariance matrix is pre-
served, but the off-diagonal terms are all set to the
average of all the stock covariances [37]: ΣCCM
ij=n
Σii, i=j;1
n(n−1)/2Pn
i=1Σij, i̸=jo
.
OPM One Parameter Matrix : Shrinkage moves away from
the sample covariance matrix toward the one parameter
covariance matrix, ΣOPM, at intensity k:˜Σ = (1 −k)Σ+
kΣOPM. Here ΣOPMhas the diagonal terms set to the
the average variance, while the off-diagonal terms are all
set to zero [38]: ΣOPM
ij=1
nPn
i=1Σii, i=j; 0, i̸=j	
.
TPM Two Parameter Matrix : Shrinkage moves away
from the sample covariance matrix toward the two
parameter covariance matrix, ΣTPM, at intensity k:
˜Σ = (1 −k)Σ + kΣTPM. Here ΣTPMis one
where diagonal terms of the sample covariance ma-
trix are all set to the the average variance, and the
off-diagonal terms are all set to the average of all
the stock covariances [35] (Appendix B.1): ΣTPM
ij=n
1
nPn
i=1Σii, i=j;1
n(n−1)/2Pn
i=1Σij;i̸=jo
.
OFMM One Factor Market Model : Shrinkage moves away
from the sample covariance matrix toward the one factor
market model covariance matrix, ΣOFMM, at intensity
k:˜Σ = (1 −k)Σ + k(ΣOFMM). Here ΣOFMMis one
where the diagonal is preserved (due to the idiosyncratic
volatility of the residuals), but the off-diagonal terms are
shrunk to the cross-sectional average of all the random
variables: ΣOPMM
ij= (s2
mββ′+ϵ)ij[36]. Here βis the
n×1 matrix of market factor loadings, ϵan×ndiagonal
matrix of residual variance estimates, and s2
mthe market
sample variance.
AOCS Asymptotically Optimal Convex Shrinkage : The
covariance matrix is a linear shrinkage between the sam-
ple covariance matrix and the identity matrix: ˜Σ =
(1−α)Σ + α(τΣ) [38].Here τis the average sample vari-
ance and α∈[0,1] is the intensity parameter computed
using α=1
tr([Σ−τ]2)1
NPN
i=1tr([zizT
i−Σ]2). This is the
only method investigated in this paper, where the shrink-
age intensity is set (and knot varied) in the simulations.
G&J Golts & Jones α-angle minimization : The covari-
ance matrix is a linear shrinkage between the sample
covariance matrix and the identity matrix, with the α-
weight angle informing the degree of shrinkage as fol-
lows (see Equation (46)), repeated here: ˜Σ =k
cosφI+
1−k
cosφ
Σ. Here kis some quantity cos( φk) for a
targeted optimal angle φk∈[φ, π/ 2] between the risky
portfolio and the expected returns.
Table 5: Shrinkage method descriptions for the methods compared
in the comparative portfolio simulations (Figures 6, 7 and 8).
folio risk, σ0. Optimisations I,II,III,IV as well as gearing
constrained optimisations V and VIII, all have the same
investment directions; in the direction of the optimal risky
17portfolio (i.e. they are all geared versions of the optimal
risky portfolio). The optimal risky portfolio is always fully
invested, and gearing can subsequently be applied, which
will make the portfolio move up the Capital Market Line
and be the tangent portfolio for the efficient frontier where
the level of gearing is a constraint.
It is the fact that these solutions are in the direction
of the optimal risk portfolio that makes the Kantorovich
inequality (Theorem 1) appropriate for proving the upper
bound of the α-weight angle (using the lower bound of the
cosine of this angle). From a geometric perspective there
is no tension between the gearing and the αdirection in
these cases, and there is only a tension between the poor
conditioning of the covariance matrix and the direction of
α. This insight lead to the idea of directly minimising
theα-angle by shrinking the covariance because for these
optimisations this direction is generated by the covariance
matrix: i.e.by the vector Σ−1α. This is not equivalent
to including a return maximisation constraint.
However, when adding an explicit gearing restriction
to certain problems, such as solutions VI and VII, gearing
can actually mimic poor conditioning and the portfolios
will have investment directions different from those opti-
misations without a gearing constraint. From the two fund
separation theorems the resulting optimal portfolio is a
weighted average of the global minimum variance portfolio
and the optimal risky portfolio. We see that naively ap-
plying gearing to any optimisation other than optimisation
IV (the Sharpe optimal portfolio that generates the opti-
mal risky portfolio) and VIII (the return maximisation)
will drag the portfolios out of alignment with αtowards
the global minimum variance portfolio.
Using fund separation theorems the global minimum
variance portfolio can be factored from the optimal portfo-
lio Eqn.(26). Geometrically there is now a tension between
the gearing, the αdirection, and the impact of poor condi-
tioning. However, the global minimum variance portfolio
is shown to be purely a function of the covariance matrix,
and is a fully invested portfolio that sums to one; it’s gear-
ing can be managed separately from the minimisation of
theα-angle. This key insight allows us to retain the idea
of minimising the α-angle.
The gearing constrained optimal portfolio has a weak-
ened upper bound that is now given by Theorem 2 [4],
and not Theorem 1 (the Kantorovich inequality) because
of the impact of the constraint. With improved condi-
tioning of the covariance matrix we see we are still able
to reduce the upper bound on the angle between the op-
timal risky portfolio and α, which would in turn reduce
the overall angle between the optimal portfolio and the
direction of αand improve overall portfolio performance
out-of-sample. In fact, we note for the constrained opti-
misation from Eqn.(26) that a minimisation over the total
α-angle φis equivalent to minimising the angle between
the optimal risky portfolio and the direction of expected
returns. This extends the unconstrained result and moti-
vates why the combination of an α-angle minimisation isequally useful both in the unconstrained and constrained
cases. To minimise the overall angle between the optimal
portfolio and the expected returns we can minimise the an-
gle between the optimal risky portfolio and the expected
returns, Eqn.(42).
What this means practically is that even when faced
with poor forecast ability in the presence of estimation
uncertainty, uncertainty that is amplified by the inversion
of the covariance matrix, the choice is not a binary one
between e.g.an equally weighted, or risk-weighted portfo-
lio, and the mean-variance solution; but rather there is a
smooth deformation of the solution between the traditional
mean-variance and the risk-weighted or equally-weight so-
lutions, that can enter the problem via constraints where
optimality is dependent on the conditioning of the covari-
ance and the constraints. This suggest that there is a
regularisation parameter that can be optimally chosen for
a given use case and dataset.
Towards this end we again look at the spherical un-
certainty region model for α, and used it to motivate a
simple robust optimisation framework. This motivates the
use of covariance matrix shrinkage that explicitly reduces
the angle between optimal risky Sharpe ratio portfolio, the
optimal risky portfolio, and the direction of expected re-
turns, and is given in Eqn.(46). We shrink the covariance
matrix using the α-angle minimisation with some regular-
isation parameter kwhich is thought of as some optimal
regularisation angle φk.
By regularising the covariance matrix to constrain the
direction of the optimal risk portfolio we achieve the over-
allα-angle minimisation regularisation as in Eqn.(46) that
is consistent with reducing the impact of the estimation
uncertainty, as expressed by the upper bound in Eqn.(17)
from Theorem 2. This choice demonstrates the emergence
of special cases, such as the equally weight portfolio solu-
tions as the limiting case of the global minimum variance
portfolio, and how this is optimally mixed within the lin-
early constrained mean-variance solution.
This is demonstrated for the case of normal returns
in Section 5.2. Where we show that in the case of ni-
ave unconstrained portfolio optimisation that the equally-
weighted portfolio’s performance better than the mean-
variance optimal portfolios. However, when applying the
method first proposed by [19] this is no longer the case, the
mean-variance portfolio’s would on average out-perform
the equally weighted portfolio’s. Similarly in the presence
of linear constraints, when the shrinkage hyper-parameters
are appropriate selected one can ensure that the constrained
mean-variance portfolio’s, on average, out-perform the equally
weighted portfolio’s. This is consistent with the distribu-
tion free general result used to motivate the method of
[19].
This is in turn confirmed using historic simulation in
Section 5.3. Here we find that under unconstrained solu-
tions and constrained solutions V, VII and VIII that the
method of Golts and Jones [19] delivers portfolios that are
better aligned to the returns of the assets, and generat-
18ing out-of-sample performance with superior Sharpe ratios
than the other methods considered. However, we note that
under constrained solution VI, this is not the case because
that particular solution naturally tends to solve for weights
that generate that minimum returns exactly, and as such
moving the portfolio weights closer to the expected return
vector is not beneficial despite improve the conditioning of
the covariance matrix.
Practically, when a fund manager is extremely uncer-
tain about the covariance between the assets, and uncer-
tain about the returns, but one has a gearing constraint,
then one should be holding Eqn.(55) where the broad di-
rection of expected returns is still of value. However, if one
has a sense for the relative variances of assets, then instead
of the diagonal matrix Iin Eqn.(46), one could use the di-
agonal covariance matrix with zero off-diagonals. The key
realisation is not that one is optimally shrinking the covari-
ance matrix to the diagonal matrix to dilute correlations
to ameliorate the impact of estimation uncertainty under
covariance matrix inversion, but rather that one is opti-
mally distorting the covariance matrix so as to optimally
exploit the geometry of the control problem itself in the
presence of constraints.
Ackowledgements
We thank Dave Bradfield for thoughtful and inspiring
discussions.
Conflict of Interest
The authors declare there is no conflict of interest.
References
Allen, D., Lizieri, C., Satchell, S., 2019. In Defense of Portfolio
Optimization: What If We Can Forecast? Financial Analysts
Journal 75:3, 20–38. doi: DOI:10.1080/0015198X.2019.1600958 .
Axelsson, O., 1996. Iterative Solution Methods. (Cambridge Univ.
Press).
Bailey, D., Borwein, J., de Prado, M.L., Zhu, Q.J., 2015. The
probability of backtest overfitting. Journal of Computational
Finance (Risk Journals) URL: https://ssrn.com/abstract=
2326253 , doi: 10.2139/ssrn.2326253 .
Bauer, F., Householder, A., 1960. Some inequalities involving the
euclidean condition of a matrix. Numer. Math. 2, 308–311. doi: 10.
1007/BF01386231 .
Bengtsson, Holst, 2002. On portfolio selection: Improved covari-
ance matrix estimation for swedish asset returns. Unpublished
Manuscript, Department of Economics, Lund University .
Best, M.J., Grauer, R.R., 1991. On the sensitivity of mean-variance
efficient portfolios to changes in asset means: Some analytical and
computational results. The Review of Financial Studies 4, 315–
342.
Black, F., Litterman, R., 1992. Global portfolio optimization. Fi-
nancial Analysts Journal 48, 28–43.
Broadie, M., 1993. Computing efficient frontiers using estimated
parameters. Annals of Operations Research 45, 21–58.
Brown, S., 1976. Optimal Portfolio Choice Under Uncertainty: A
Bayesian Approach. Ph.D. thesis. Univeristy of Chicago.Cavadini, H., Sbuelz, A., Trojani, F., 2001. A simplified way of
incorporating model risk, estimation risk, and robustness in mean
variance portfolio management. Technical Report, University of
Southern Switzerland .
Ceria, S., Stubbs, R., 2016. Incorporating estimation errors into
portfolio selection: Robust portfolio construction., in: Satchell S.
(eds) Asset Management.. Palgrave Macmillan, Cham.
Chopra, V., Ziemba, W., 1993. The effect of errors in means, vari-
ances, and covariances on optimal portfolio choice. Journal of
Portfolio Management Winter, 19, 2, 6–11.
Clarke, R.G., de Silva, H., Thorley, S., 2006. Minimum-variance
portfolios in the u.s. equity market. Journal of Portfolio Manage-
ment 33, 10–24. doi: 10.3905/jpm.2006.661366 .
Costa, O.L.V., Paiva, A.C., 2002. Robust portfolio selection using
linear-matrix inequalities. Journal of Economic Dynamics and
Control 26, 889–909.
Disatnik, Benninga, 2007. Shrinking the covariance matrix. Journal
of Portfolio Management 33, 55–63.
Frankfurter, G., Phillips, H., Seagle, J., 1971. Portfolio selection:
The effect of uncertain means, variances and covariances. Journal
of Financial and Quantitative Analysis , 1251–1262.
Galluccio, S., Bouchaud, J.P., Potters, M., 1998. Ratio-
nal decisions, random matrices and spin glasses. Phys-
ica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 259, 449–
456. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S037843719800332X , doi: 10.1016/S0378-4371(98)00332-X .
Goldfarb, D., Iyengar, G., 2003. Robust portfolio selection problems.
Mathematics of operations research 28, 1–38.
Golts, M., Jones, G.C., 2009. A sharper angle on optimization. SSRN
(October 5, 2009). URL: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1483412 ,
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1483412 .
G´ abor, A., Kondor, I., 1999. Portfolios with nonlinear con-
straints and spin glasses. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics
and its Applications 274, 222–228. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378437199003878 ,
doi:10.1016/S0378-4371(99)00387-8 .
Halldorsson, B.V., Tutuncu, R.H., 2003. An interior-point method
for a class of saddle-point problems. Journal of Optimization The-
ory and Applications 116, 559 to 590.
Horn, R.A., Johnson, C.R., 1985. Matrix Analysis. (Cambridge
University Press, London).
Householder, A., 1965. The kantorovich and some related in-
equalities. SIAM Review 7, 463–473. URL: RetrievedJune23,
2021,fromhttp://www.jstor.org/stable/2027767 , doi: 10.1137/
1007104 .
Householder, A.S., 1964. The Theory of Matrices in Numerical Anal-
ysis. (Blaisdell, New York).
Householder, A.S., Bauer, F.L., 1960. On certain iterative methods
for solving linear systems. Numer. Math. 2, 55–59.
Huang, J., Zhou, J., 2005. A direct proof and a generalization for a
kantorovich type inequality. Linear Algebra and its Applications
394, 185–192.
Ingersoll, J.E., 1987. Theory of Financial Decision Making. (Rowman
and Littlefield Publishers, Lanham).
Jagannathan, Ma, 2003. Risk reduction in large portfolios: Why
imposing the wrong constraints helps. The Journal of Finance 58,
1651–1683.
Jobson, J., Korkie, B., 1980. Estimation for markowitz efficient port-
folios. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 544–554.
Jobson, J., Korkie, B., 1981. Performance hypothesis testing with
the sharpe and treynor measures. Journal of Finance 36, 889–908.
Jorion, P., 1985. International portfolio diversification with estima-
tion risk. Journal of Business 58, 259–278.
Kan, R., Zhou, G., 2007. Optimal portfolio choice with parameter
uncertainty. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 42,
621–656.
Lai, T.L., Xing, H., Chen, Z., 2011. Mean-variance portfolio opti-
mization when means and covariances are unknown. The Annals
of Applied Statistics 5, 798–823.
Ledoit, Wolf, 2003a. Honey, i shrunk the sample covariance matrix.
Journal of Portfolio Management 30, 110–119. doi: 10.3905/jpm.
192004.110 .
Ledoit, O., 1995. Essays on risk and return in the stock market.
PhD thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Sloan School
of Management .
Ledoit, O., Wolf, M., 2003b. Improved estimation of the covariance
matrix of stock returns with an application to portfolio selection.
Journal of Empirical Finance 10, 603–621.
Ledoit, O., Wolf, M., 2004a. Honey, i shrunk the sample covariance
matrix. Journal of Portfolio Management 30, 110–119.
Ledoit, O., Wolf, M., 2004b. A well-conditioned estimator for large-
dimensional covariance matrices. Journal of Multivariate Analysis
88, 365–411.
Lee, W., 2000. Theory and methodology of tactical asset allocation.
volume 65. (John Wiley & Sons).
Markowitz, H., 1952. Portfolio selection. The Journal of Finance ,
77–91.
Merton, R.C., 1972. An analytic derivation of the efficient portfo-
lio frontier. Journal of financial and quantitative analysis 7(4),
1851–1872.
Michaud, R.O., 1989. The markowitz optimization enigma is opti-
mized optimal. Financial Analysts Journal 45, 31–42.
Michaud, R.O., 1998. Efficient Asset Management: A Practical
Guide to Stock Portfolio Optimization and Asset Allocation. (Ox-
ford University Press, USA).
Paskaramoorthy, A., Gebbie, T., Van Zyl, T.L., 2021. The efficient
frontiers of mean-variance portfolio rules under distribution mis-
specification, in: 2021 IEEE 24th International Conference on In-
formation Fusion (FUSION), pp. 1–8. doi: 10.23919/FUSION49465.
2021.9626916 .
de Prado, M.L., Bailey, D., 2012. The sharpe ratio efficient frontier.
Journal of Risk 5(12), Winter 2012/13.
Pun, C.S., Wong, H.Y., 2019. A linear programming model for se-
lection of sparse high-dimensional multiperiod portfolios. Euro-
pean Journal of Operational Research 273, 754–771. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2018.08.025 .
Scherer, B., 2002. Portfolio resampling: Review and critique. Finan-
cial Analysts Journal 58, 98–109. doi: 10.2469/faj.v58.n6.2489 .
Tutuncu, R.H., Koenig, M., 2004. Robust asset allocation. Annals
of Operations Research 132, 157–187.
Tuy, H., Hoai-Phuong, N., 2007. A robust algorithm for quadratic
optimization under quadratic constraints. Journal of Global Op-
timization 37, 557–569. doi: 10.1007/s10898-006-9063-7 .
Zimmermann, H., Nierdermayer, D., 2007. Robust portfolio opti-
mization. Finance Theory Course, Winter 2007, University of
Basel.
Appendix A. Kantorovich Inequality
Following Householder (1964) and Horn and Johnson
(1985). Let A∈Mnbe Hermitian and positive definite;
letρ1andρnbe its smallest and largest eigenvalues. Let
there be a non-zero vector x∈Cnwith a Euclidean norm.
Consider two positive semi-definite matrices ρnI−Aand
A−ρ1I, and a positive definite matrix A−1. These are
Hermitian matrices and commute; their product is Her-
mitian and positive semi-definite. Therefore, for any non-
zero complex valued vector xwith a complex conjugate
transpose xH
0≤xH(ρnI−A)(A−ρ1I)A−1x
=xH 
(ρ1+ρn)I−ρ1ρnA−1−A
x (A.1)
and so xHAx+ρ1ρn(xHA−1x)≤(ρ1+ρn)(xHx). Ift0=
ρ1ρn(xHA−1x) then t0(xHAx)≤t0(ρ1+ρn)(xHx)−t2
0.
The function f(t) =t(ρ1+ρn)(xHx)−t2is concave and
has a critical point at t=1
2(xHx)(ρ1+ρn) where it hasa global maximum. Therefore f(t0)≤1
4(xHx)2(ρ1+ρn)2
and it then follows that ρ1ρn(xHA−1x)(xHAx)≤1
4(ρ1+
ρn)2(xHx)2. This is the Kantorovich inequality:
(xHAx)(xHA−1x)≤(ρ1+ρn)2
4ρ1ρn(xHx)2. (A.2)
The inequality now holds by construction for all v∈Rn\{0}
as in Theorem 1 where the Hermitian transpose Hbecomes
a matrix transpose T.
Appendix B. Bauer and Householder Inequality
A very elegant direct proof is given in Huang and Zhou
(2005). Here we rather follow Bauer and Householder
(1960) to motivate the result. Let Abe a non-singular
matrix, and xany vector with Euclidean norm. When A
has a Euclidean bound norm2and if the inverse of A exists
then there is an associated condition number3(also known
as the Euclidean condition). Given any two unit vectors
ξandηthen4ξHη=eiθcosψwhere the angle ψbetween
the two unit vectors is restricted to ψ∈[0, π/2]. Consider
matrices eA= (Aξ, Aη) andfM=eAHeA. Ifζis another
unit vector in the place of ξandηand orthogonal to ξ,
then for some M= (ξ,ζ)HAHA(ξ,ζ) we can define a ma-
trixQ= [1 eiθcosψ; 0eiθsinψ] such that fM=QHMQ.
From the Euclidean condition κ(fM)≤κ2(Q)κ(M). If
κ(M)≤κ(AHA) then
κ2(Q) =κ(QHQ) =1 + cos ψ
1−cosψ= cot2ψ
2
. (B.1)
This means that for unit vectors ξandηandeA= (Aξ, Aη)
where |ξHη| ≤ cos(ψ) then ( κ(eAHA))1
2≤κ(A) cotψ/2.
Similarly, with fM= (ξ,η)HM(ξ,η) and some positive
definite Mthen κ(fM)≤κ(M) cot2ψ/2. From the cosine
angle between AξandAηand iffM= [em11em12;em21em22]
then:
(Aξ)HAη
∥Aξ∥·∥Aη∥2
=em12em21
em11em22= 1−detfM
em11em22. (B.2)
IffMhas characteristic roots τandτκ(fM) then det fM=
τ2κ(fM) and ( em11em22)1
2≤1
2(em11+em22) =τ
2(1 +κ(fM))
so that B.2 is bounded above
(Aξ)HAη
∥Aξ∥·∥Aη∥2
≤1−4κ(M)
(1 +κ(M))2=κ(M)−1
κ(M) + 12
≤κ2(A) cot2ψ/2−1
κ2(A) cot2ψ/2+ 12
.
2For singular values σ2
i(A) =λi(AHA) with eigenvalues λithe
Euclidean norm is a scalar ∥A∥= max ∥x∥=1∥Ax∥=σmax(A).
3The condition number or Euclidean condition is a scalar κ(A) =
∥A∥·∥A−1∥=σmax(A)
σmin(A)
4For (Hermitian) complex conjugate transpose H.
20Forκ≥1 the term ( κ−1)/(κ+1) is a monotonic function
ofκso we can choose some cot(ϕ/2) =κ(A) cotψ/2. The
last term above, the squared quotient on the right, then
becomes cos2ψwithξ=x∥x∥−1andη=y∥y∥−1. Thus,
we have shown that for any two non-null vectors xandy,
and any non-singular matrix A, that |yHx| ≤ ∥x∥∥y∥cosψ
forψ∈[0, π/2]. This implies that
|(Ay)HAx| ≤ ∥Ax∥∥Ay∥cosϕ, (B.3)
for cotϕ/2=κ(A) cotψ/2. Similarly, for any positive defi-
nite matrix Mthis can then be extended to imply:
|yHMx|2≤(xHMx)(yHMy) cos2(ϕ), (B.4)
for cot2ϕ/2=κ(M) cot2ψ/2. Now, consider an arbitrary
rectangular matrix of linearly independent columns Yso
thatAYcan be defined.
The matrix H=I−AHY(YHAAHY)−1YHAis then
a Hermitian idempotent annihilating5AHY. Using that
we can choose some M=AAH, we change notation to
r=Asandx=AHs= [I−MY(YHMY)−1YH]r. Ifr
is in the subspace of MY, then either Hs= 0 or xis a
null-vector, and then xHM−1x=rHM−1x. Using this,
and that H2=H:
∥Hs∥2
∥s∥2=(rHM−1x)
(rHM−1r)=|rHM−1x|2
(rHM−1r)(xHM−1x).(B.5)
Since κ(M−1) = κ(M) and κ(AH) = κ(A) then H=
I−AHY(YHAAHY)−1YHAands=A−1r. IfYhas only
a single column ythen H=I−(AHy)(yHA)/||AHy||and
with some linear algebra it follows that
∥Hs∥2
∥s∥2= 1−|rHy|2
∥yHA∥∥A−1r∥. (B.6)
Using that xis orthogonal to Ywhere the cosine of
the angle between rand the subspace of Yis cos( Y,r) =
∥Y(YHY)−1Yr∥/∥r∥we have that cos( x,r)≤[1−cos2(Y,r)]1
2.
Then we have that ∥Y(YHY)−1YHr∥ ≥ ∥ r∥sinψwhich
implies that ∥Hs∥ ≤ ∥ s∥cosψ. From this an optimal
bound for B.5, and thus B.6, can be obtained when the
space of Ycontains r:
||Hs||
||s||≤[κ2(A)−1]
[κ2(A) + 1]. (B.7)
The bound |yHr| ≥ ∥y∥∥r∥sinψfor implies ∥Hs∥ ≤ ∥s∥cosϕ.
Now, if the equality |yHr|=∥y∥∥r∥sinψ0holds for ψ0∈
[0, π/2] then:
∥yHA∥∥A−1r∥
∥yH∥∥r∥≤sinψ0
sinϕ=1
2
(κ+κ−1) + (κ−κ−1) cosψ0
.
5Solving systems of linear equations can be done using a sequence
of Hermitian operators of the form H, each operating upon the pre-
vious residual s, to form a new residual Hs; this is the method of
iterative projection (Householder and Bauer, 1960).Here the bound on the right decreases as ψ0increases be-
cause cos ψ0decreases on [0 , π/2]. It then follows that for
any non-null vectors uandv, and any non-singular ma-
trixA, that |vHu| ≥ ∥vH∥∥u∥sinψwith ψ∈[0, π/2] for
κ=κ(A) implies:
∥vHA∥∥A−1u∥
∥vH∥∥u∥≤sinψ
sinϕ=1
2
(κ+κ−1) + (κ−κ−1) cosψ
.
Now, for any non-null vectors vandu, and any positive
definite matrix M=AA−1:
(uHMu)(vHM−1v)
(uHu)(vHv)≤sin2ψ
sin2ϕ=
(κ2+ 1) + ( κ2−1) cos ψ2
4κ2
where κ2=κ(M). Re-arranging terms then gives this
equivalently as Theorem 26:
(uHv)2
(uHMu)(v∗M−1v)≥4
κψ+ 2 + κ−1
ψforκψ=κ(M)1+sin ψ
1−sinψ.
Appendix C. Minimax degeneracy
When the mean variance optimisation problem is un-
constrained, then the direction of the optimised weights
vector θ∗in a mean variance optimisation procedure can
be given by θ∗∝Σ−1αand the quantity cos( ϕ) is shown
to be bounded from below when using that the covari-
ance matrix is positive semi-definite and can be factored
as Σ = S′Sin terms of symmetric matrices S and choosing
thatv=Sαin the Kantorovich inequality (Theorem 1 in
Section 1.3):
cos2ϕ=(α′θ∗)2
(α′α)(θ∗′θ∗)
=(v′v)
(v′Σv)(v′Σ−1v)≥√ρnρ1
1
2(ρn+ρ1)2
.(C.1)
The lower bound quantity√ρnρ1
1
2(ρn+ρ1)is the minimax de-
generacy (or condition number) of the matrix Σ. The α-
weight angle can be thus be estimated from the covariance
matrix Σ with eigenvalues ρnand eigenvectors qn. This
presents the worst case angle that can be achieved when
attempting to align the direction of the optimal risky port-
folio with that of the direction of expected returns. Equal-
ity can only be achieved in Equation (C.1) when:
α=±√ρ1q1±√ρnqnandθ∗=±q1√ρ1±qn√ρn.(C.2)
This is visualised in Figure C.9. This worst case angle of
alignment can be seen to be problematic as the portfo-
lio is largely invested along the lowest volatility principal
component qn. This implies a potentially significant loss
of investment performance due to estimation error (See
Appendix C).
6Forψ=π/2, and u=v, this recovers the Kantorovich inequality
derived in Appendix A
21qn(min)q1(max)
α=√ρ1q1+√ρnqn
θ∗=q1√ρ1+qn√ρnϕ
θ∗
z=q1√ηρ1+qn√ρnφ
Figure C.9: The constrained α-weight angle and maximum and min-
imum eigenvalues, ρ1andρn, with associated eigenvectors q1and
qn, where α′θ=|α||θ|cos(φ). Here θis the optimal portfolio con-
trol, and αthe expected asset return vector. This visualises the
extent to which the optimal portfolio is typically invested aligned
with the lowest volatility direction qn.
Similarly, when the mean variance optimisation prob-
lem is linearly constrained, in particular when we get solu-
tions VI and VII (from Table 2), the direction of the opti-
mal portfolio weight vector θ∗is now given by θ∗
z∝Σ−1z
in terms of a vector zthat does not in general align with
the direction of the returns αbecause it now includes de-
pendency on the constraints and we use y=Sz.:
cos2φ=(α′θ∗
z)2
(α′α)(θ∗
z′θ∗
z)
=(v′z)
(v′Σv)(z′Σ−1z)≥4κψ
(κψ+ 1)2(C.3)
Here ψis 0≥ψ≥π
2and smaller than the angle φ
κψ=ρ1
ρn(1 + sin( ψ))
(1−sin(ψ)). (C.4)
By setting η=(1+sin( ψ))
(1−sin(ψ))≥1 we can calculate that the
worst case angle for alignment with the expected returns
from equality with the lower bound achieved when:
α=±√ηρ1q1±√ρnqnandθ∗
z=±q1√ηρ1±qn√ρn.(C.5)
Again this is problematic (See Appendix C). However, a
key nuance is that optimal portfolio lower bound in gear-
ing constrained optimisations, optimisations VI and VII
(from Table 2), is given by equation (C.5) from Bauer
and Householder (1960), but that the key lower bound for
the optimal risky portfolio remains that given in equation
(C.2) as governed by the Kantorovich inequality (House-
holder, 1964, Horn and Johnson, 1985). This is the key
insight that allows the refined shrinkage method to be de-
fined: 1.) constrain the angle as in the unconstrained op-
timisation using the method of Golts and Jones (2009),
and then 2.) include the linear constraint restrictions.
This is also why exclusively deciding between either the
optimal mean-variance portfolio or the equally weighted
benchmark is inconsistent and sub-optimal irrespective of
the level of estimation uncertainty (similarly confirmed un-
der normally distributed numerical simulation in Section
5).Appendix D. Two-fund Separation
The two fund separation theorem derived by Markowitz
(1952) states that: i.) the optimal portfolio exists, ii.) it
is unique for any given return expectation level αp, and
iii.) it can be separated into two distinct portfolios aand
bfrom which all optimal portfolios θ∗can be generated:
θ∗= (1−αp)a+αp(a+b).
This is can proved by first considering two new optimal
portfolios gandh. Then let qbe another optimal portfolio
such that q=µg+ (1−µ)hfor a real number µ.
Now αg̸=αh, because they are distinct portfolios.
So, there exists an unique solution to the equation: αq=
µαg+(1−µ)αh. Consider another portfolio pwith weights
(µ,(1−µ)) which has invested in portfolio’s gandh, it
will satisfy: p=µ(a+bαg) + (1 −µ)(a+bαh), so that
p=a+bαq. Therefore, p=q; and the optimal portfo-
lio is unique and exists. Further details relating to fund
separation theorems can be seen in Ingersoll (1987).
All investors who choose portfolios by examining only
mean and variance can be satisfied by holding different
combinations of only a few (in this case 2) portfolios re-
gardless of their preferences. All of the original assets,
therefore, can be purchased by just two portfolios, and
the investors can then just buy them in various ratios.
Appendix E. Maximum return portfolio
To find an investment portfolio with maximum return
at a given level of portfolio variance with a gearing con-
straint we want to solve:
arg max
θ
θ′α	
s.t. σ2
p=θ′Σθ≤σ0and1′θ=g0.(E.1)
which can be reduced to the following Lagrangian with two
Lagrange multipliers λ= (λ1, λ2) but with a quadratic
constraint and a linear constraint:
L=−θ′α−λ′σ2
p−θ′Σθ
g0−1′θ
. (E.2)
It should be expected here that picking a gearing g0neces-
sarily fixes the variance of the portfolio. However there are
multiple portfolios with the different portfolio variances,
but the same leverage. We would like the minimum vari-
ance portfolio at a particular gearing g0. This is then a
multi-objective function optimisation. Hence we rather
find the targeted variance first, and then set that variance
to provide a portfolio with the required leverage.
Here we want to ensure that there is an upper bound
on portfolio risk: σ2
p≤σ2
0and we know that a choice of
σ2
pwill set the portfolio gearing. Hence we rather solve
the well known reduced problem with a single Lagrange
multiplier λand then fix the leverage:
L=−θ′α−λ(σ2
p−θ′Σθ). (E.3)
22The first order (Kuhn-Tucker) conditions are: Lθ=−α+
λ2Σθ= 0, and Lλ=σ2
p−θ′Σθ= 0. The second order
conditions are Lθθ= 2λΣ1≥0=⇒λ≥0.
Multiplying the first order condition Lθbyθ′and Σ−1
to find:
0 = −θ′α+ (2λ)θ′Σθ, (E.4)
0 = −Σ−1α+ (2λ)θ. (E.5)
We factor the optimal portfolio out of equation (E.5):
(2λ)θ∗= Σ−1α. (E.6)
We now make use of the following substitutions
A=1′Σ−11 (E.7)
B=α′Σ−11=1′Σ−1α (E.8)
C=α′Σ−1α (E.9)
D=AC−B2. (E.10)
Here Dis positive, by the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, since
we have assumed that Σ is non-singular and all assets do
not have the same mean: α̸=|α|
n1. If all means were the
same, then D= 0, and this problem has no solution.
Multiply equation (E.5) from the left by α′to find:
C= (2λ)αp. (E.11)
To find λwe now substitute the portfolio expected returns
and risk into equation (E.4) to find αp= (2λ)2σ2
pand then
substitute αpinto equation (E.11) to find:
(2λ)2σ2
p=C. (E.12)
Which gives the solution to optimisation I when substi-
tuted into equation (E.6):
θ∗
1=σp√
CΣ−1α. (E.13)
To set the gearing we multiply (E.13) from the left by 1′
to find that
g0=σpB√
C. (E.14)
The solution to optimisation V in terms of gearing is:
θ∗
5=g01
BΣ−1α=g0θα. (E.15)
This is just a gearing optimal risky portfolio. For this
reason optimisations I and V are treated as equivalent as
they have the same investment directions. The ratio B/A
is just the ratio of the variance of optimal risky portfolio
to the variance of global minimum variance portfolio.
Appendix F. Minimum risk portfolio
We want to find an investment portfolio with minimum
variance and a targeted return with the additional gearing
constraint, hence we want to solve for:
arg min
θ1
2θ′Σθ
s.t.α′θ=αp≥α0and1′θ=g0.
(F.1)which can be reduced to the following Lagrangian with
two Lagrange multipliers λ= (λ1, λ2):
L=1
2θ′Σθ−λ′
α′θ−αp
1′θ−g0
. (F.2)
From the Kuhn-Tucker conditions
Lθ= Σθ−λ′α
1
= 0, (F.3)
Lλ=α′θ−αp
1′θ−g0
= 0 (F.4)
Solving for θin terms of λfrom (F.3)
θ∗
6= Σ−1λα
1
=λ1Σ−1α+λ2Σ−11 (F.5)
We now solve for λby multiplying (F.5) first by 1′and
then by α′and then substituting these into equation (F.4):
g0=λ11′Σ−1α+λ21′Σ−11 (F.6)
αp=λ1α′Σ−1α+λ2α′Σ−11 (F.7)
We again make use of the following substitutions from
equations (E.7),(E.8),(E.9) and (E.10). Using these we
simplify equations (F.6) and (F.7) to:
g0=λ1B+λ2A, (F.8)
αp=λ1C+λ2B. (F.9)
From (F.9) above, we can see that
λ2=αp−λ1C
B(F.10)
And by substituting (F.10) above into (F.8)
g0=λ1B+A
B(αp−λ1C) (F.11)
Solving for λ1:
λ1=αpA−g0B
D. (F.12)
Substituting (F.12) into (F.10) we then solve for λ2:
λ2=αpA−g0B
D(F.13)
Finally, from (F.12) and (F.13) as substituted into (F.5)
we find
θ∗
6=αpA−g0B
D
Σ−1α+g0C−αpB
D
Σ−11
(F.14)
We can then put this into the form θ∝Σ−1z, where zis
the same dimension as α:
θ∗
6= Σ−1αpA−g0B
D
α+g0C−αpB
D
1
.
This can be reduced further to find the global minimum
risk portfolio associated with a particular value of the gear-
ing parameter g0, this allows us to define a second efficient
frontier, as a function of g0, by eliminating αpby enforcing
that∂αpσ2
p= 0. We are effectively putting a lower bound
on the portfolio returns α0by associating this with the
unleveraged global minimum variance portfolio.
23Appendix G. Mean-variance portfolio
The gearing constrained mean-variance optimal port-
folio choice problem is given by the optimisation:
argmaxθ(
θ′α−γ
2θ′Σθ)
s.t1′θ=g0. (G.1)
It has a Lagrangian with a single Lagrage multiplier:
L=−θ′α+γ
2θ′Σθ−λ(θ′1−g0). (G.2)
Solving the first order optimality conditions (the Kuhn-
Tucker equations) we find:
Lθ=−α+γΣθ−λ1=0, (G.3)
Lλ=θ′1−g0= 0 (G.4)
Using equation (G.3) to solve for the optimal control θ∗
and then substituting this into equation (G.4) to eliminate
the Lagrange multiplier, to then find the optimal portfolio:
θ∗
7=
g0−1
γ1′Σ−1αΣ−11
1′Σ−11+1
γΣ−1α.
Appendix H. Optimal risky portfolio
To find an investment portfolio that maximises the
Sharpe ratio αp/σpbut with a gearing constraint and set-
ting the risk free rate to zero; we want to solve:
arg max
θθ′α√
θ′Σθ
s.t.1′θ=g0. (H.1)
This can be reduced to a Lagrangian with a single La-
grange multiplier:
L=−θ′α√
θ′Σθ−λ(θ′1−g0). (H.2)
From the first order conditions
Lθ=−α
(θ′Σθ)1
2+θ′α
(θ′Σθ)3
2Σθ−λ1=0. (H.3)
Lλ=θ′1−g0= 0. (H.4)
We can multiply equation (H.3) by θ′and using equation
(H.4) we find that the Lagrange multiplier: λg0= 0 and
hence that λ= 0 for g0̸= 0.
Using this and multiplying equation (H.3) from the left
by Σ−1we can show that:
θ∗
8=θ′α√
θ′Σθ−1
Σ−1α. (H.5)
This is convenient because we can now multiply this from
the left by the transposed unit vector 1′and use equation
(H.4), to find that:
g0=θ′α√
θ′Σθ−1
1′Σ−1α. (H.6)Substituting this into equation (H.5) this gives the optimal
leveraged risk adjusted portfolio:
θ∗
8=g0Σ−1α
1′Σ−1α=g0θα. (H.7)
We note that optimisation I, II, III and IV are all spe-
cial cases of general leverage Sharpe ratio optimisation in
problem VIII – they are all geared optimal risky portfolios.
Appendix I. Portfolio diversity constraint
The problem of finding a portfolio constrained to a
given number of effective bets n0(Galluccio et al., 1998,
G´ abor and Kondor, 1999) requires a quadratic constraint,
and this constraint can been seen to act as a regularisa-
tion condition. Such an investment portfolio with mini-
mum variance, gearing constrained, but with a quadratic
constraints is the following problem:
arg max
θn
θ′α−γ
2θ′Σθo
s.t.1′θ=g0andθ′θ=1/n0.
This is a special case of the problem of Quadratic Op-
timisation with Quadratic Constraint (QOQC) (Tuy and
Hoai-Phuong, 2007). Here the Lagrangian has two La-
grange multipliers λ= (λ1, λ2):
L=−θ′α+γ
2θ′Σθ−λ′θ′θ−1/n0
1′θ−g0
. (I.1)
The first order conditions are:
Lθ=−α+γΣθ−λ′θ
1
= 0, (I.2)
Lλ=θ′θ−1/n0
1′θ−g0
= 0. (I.3)
By multiplying equation (I.2) by θand using the con-
straints (I.3) we find that: λ2=αp−1
γσ2
p−λ1
n0.
The second order constraint gives a convexity condi-
tion:
Lθθ=γΣ1−λ11≥0=⇒λ1≥γ
n1′Σ1. (I.4)
Solving for θin terms of λfrom equations (I.2) and
(I.3) where for the identity matrix Inwe find:
θ∗= (λ1In+γΣ)−1(α+λ21). (I.5)
This is no longer of the form θ∗∝Σ−1xfor some vector
xbut we can make the substitution:
˜Σ = ( λ1In+γΣ) (I.6)
to get the solution into a regularised form θ∗∝˜Σ−1x. The
regularised covariance matrix is still positive semi-definite
and hence it can still be factorised into two symmetric
matrices; the Bauer and Householder (1960) extension of
the Kantorovich inequality then remains valid with regards
to the condition number of new covariance matrix ˜Σ. So
theα-angle is still bound below by the condition number.
Hence improving the conditioning by aligning the resulting
optimal portfolio with the expected returns makes sense.
24