O. Romanko, A.  Narayan, R.  H. Kwon  ChatGPT -based Investment Portfolio Selection  1 
 
 Oleksandr Romanko  
 oleksandr.romanko@sscinc.com  
 
 Akhilesh Narayan  
 akhilesh.narayan@iitb.ac.in  
 
✉ Roy H. Kwon  
 rkown@mie.utoronto.ca  
 
1 SS&C Algorithmics, 200 Front Street West, suite 2500, Toronto, ON, M5V3K2, Canada  
 
2 Department of Me chanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, 400076, India  
 
3 Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, University of Toronto, 5 King's College Road, Toronto, ON, M5S3G9, Can ada  
ChatGPT -based  Investment Portfolio Selection  
Oleksandr Romanko1,3 · Akhilesh Narayan2 · Roy H.  Kwon3 
First version: 11  August  2023  
 
Abstract     In this paper, we explore potential use s of generative AI models, such as ChatGPT, for 
investment portfolio selection. Trusting  investment advice from G enerative Pre -Trained Transformer  (GPT) 
models is a challenge due to model "hallucinations ", necessitating careful verification and validation of  the 
output. Therefore, we take an alternative approach. We use ChatGPT to obtain a universe of stocks from 
S&P500 market index that are potentially attractive for investing. Subsequently, we compared various 
portfolio optimization strategies that utilized  this AI -generated trading universe, evaluating th ose against 
quantitative portfolio optimization models  as well as  comparing to  some of the popular investment funds . 
Our findings indicate that ChatGPT is effective in stock selection but may not perform as well in assigning 
optimal weights to stocks within the portfolio. But when stocks select ion by ChatGPT is combined with 
established portfolio optimization models , we ach ieve even better results. By blending strengths of AI -
generated stock selection with advanced quantitative optimization techniques, we observed the potential for 
more robust and favorable investment outcomes, suggesting a hybrid approach for more effective  and reliable 
investment decision -making in the future . 
Keywords     Portfolio optimization  · Investment management  · Generative AI  · ChatGPT  
 
1 Introduction  
The advent of generative artificial intelligence (AI) models, particularly large language models (LLMs) like 
ChatGPT, marks a significant development  and can potentially disrupt different industries , including 
finance  [1,10,11,13,17]. These models, based on the transformative architecture of generative AI, can 
generate detailed, contextually coherent outputs by analyzing massive text datasets, and have demonstrated 
impressive capabilities in tasks ranging from creative writing to comple x problem -solving. The use of these 
models, ChatGPT in particular, for selection of investment strategies or "stock picking " has drawn significant 
attention  [2,3,4,8,9,14] since the launch of ChatGPT in November  2022 and especially GPT -4 [15], its more 
advanced successor, in mid -March  2023 . Other LLMs available at the time of writing this paper, such as 
Bard from Google or Claude  2 from Anthropic, may be considered as alternatives t o GPT models from 
Open AI. 
However, the question of how effective ChatGPT might be in selecting financial assets, such as stocks, 
for investing , remains open. One challenge arises from the black -box nature of generative AI models, which 
involve complex non -linearities, making it difficult to discern how they analyze their training data to define 
investment strategies. The specifics of the training  data used for the GPT -4 model are unknown, adding O. Romanko, A. Narayan, R.H. Kwon  ChatGPT -based Investment Portfolio Selection  2 
 
another layer of uncertainty. Furthermore, GPT models are subject to 'hallucinations'. This refers to instances 
where the AI, although generating text based on its training, does so without a solid concept ual framework 
behind it. This issue is particularly problematic for investment strategies, as erroneous or misleading 
information could lead to significant financial repercussions, underscoring the need for rigorous validation 
and verification before these  models can be utilized in practice.  
Despite  mentioned  challenges , the potential  of these models remains significant. By rigorously testing, 
validating, and refining the outputs of ChatGPT, i.e., GPT -selected portfolios, with proven quantitative 
finance mo dels like portfolio optimization, we may unlock new opportunities in the realm of investment 
strateg ies selection.  
In this study, we utilized the GPT -4 model through its API. At the time of writing, the GPT -4 model was 
trained on data prior to September  2021. Consequently, we used historical data up prior to September  2021 
as our in -sample data for portfolio selection models and post -September  2021 data was used for out -of-
sample testing.  
As the GPT -4 model was trained on large  text datasets, it should be able to indirectly derive "sentiment " 
towards performance and even risks of various stocks (and potentially other financial assets like bonds).  In 
addition to biases incorporated in datasets used for training, e.g., some stocks  may be mentioned much more 
frequently in text data, there are biases related to probabilistic nature of generative AI. Hence, ChatGPT may 
not be able to "reason " well about why it picks certain stocks.  The underlying hypothesis is that the frequency 
and p ositivity of mentions related to a given stock in its training data (by different analysts, in the company 
reports, in blog posts, news articles , research publications  and other text documents) may influence its 
selection. Thus, stocks that received signif icant "positive sentiment " or were associated with successful 
investment and trading strategies in the training datasets are more likely to be recommended by ChatGPT.  It 
is not clear if risks are accounted at the same level as performance/reward.  
In this s tudy, we aim to leverage a vast dataset on which ChatGPT was trained to identify "most popular" 
or "most performing" stocks. We then test stocks suggested by ChatGPT and simple strategies based on those  
and apply quantitative finance techniques, such as portfolio optimization, to e nhance the suggested strategies. 
To conduct our experiments, we asked ChatGPT to generate three distinct trading universes of stocks from 
the S&P500 market index, with the goal of outperforming the index. These trading universes varied in size, 
consisting of 15, 30, and 45  stocks, respectively. We further asked ChatGPT to assign asset weights to each 
of the stocks, leading to the creation of three distinct ChatGPT -weighted portfolios (one for each trading 
universe).  
However, an inherent challenge with this approach is that ChatGPT may return different asset universes 
each time we send a request to the GPT -4 API. Hence, to increase robustness, we repeated the API request 
to ChatGPT 30  times and kept a record of how frequently each stock was found in the outpu t. From these 
results, we selected the 15, 30, and 45 most frequently suggested stocks for our respective portfolios . In some 
rare cases, it may also return to us stocks that are not in the S&P500 index. To  address this  issue , we verified 
whether each of the assets returned by ChatGPT is in the S&P500 market index.  
A second goal of this study is to compare portfolios suggested by the GPT -4 model with those derived 
using established portfolio optimization techniques. Specificall y, we computed the Markowitz mean -
variance efficient frontier  [12] for the universe of assets suggested by ChatGPT.  To ensure a fair comparison, 
we imposed constr aints on asset weights within our optimized portfolios. More precisely, we mandated that 
each asset's weight should be approximately between half and double the equal weight of (1/𝑛), where 𝑛 is 
the number of assets in the portfolio. For instance, with a portfolio of 15  assets, the weight of each asset 
would be confined to the range between 3% and 13%. Simultaneously, the sum of all weights was constrained O. Romanko, A. Narayan, R.H. Kwon  ChatGPT -based Investment Portfolio Selection  3 
 
to equal one. Subsequently, using fiv e years of weekly data prior to September  2021, we calculated a vector 
of expected returns and covariance matrix of returns. On this in -sample data , we perform mean -variance 
optimization and plot the Markowitz efficient frontier. From the efficient fro ntier, we selected three key 
portfolios: minimum variance portfolio, maximum expected return portfolio, and maxim um Sharpe ratio  
portfolio  [16]. We conducted this process for trading universes  of size 15, 30, and 45, resulting in five distinct 
portfolios of each size for comparison, namely GPT -weighted portfolio, equally weighted portf olio, 
minimum variance portfolio, maximum expected return portfolio, and maximum Sharpe ratio portfolio.  
In addition to this, we decided to include portfolios created by cardinality -constrained optimization from 
the S&P500 universe  of stocks . This involved  running cardinality -constrained optimization problem s [5], 
computing Marko witz efficient frontier with a n additional  constraint ensuring a selection of exactly 15 out 
of all S&P500 stocks, and then repeating the process for 30 and 45  stocks. To maintain fairness,  i.e., 
comparing portfolios of the same size,  we also placed minimum and maximum holding constraints on asset 
weights, ensuring tha t the weight of each stock either fell between the lower and upper bounds or was set to 
zero in the course of optimization . After calculating these cardinality -constrained efficient frontiers, we 
selected three portfolios from each – minimum  variance, maxi mum expected return, and maximum Sharpe 
ratio portfolios – to add to our comparison. The rationale behind using cardinality -constrained optimization 
was to thoroughly evaluate ChatGPT's "stock picking" capability. By exploring all possible combinations of 
stocks within the S&P500 universe, we could assess the model's ability to select promising investment 
options , ensuring a comprehensive and rigorous analysis of portfolio construction strategies.  
Finally, we evaluated  and compared  performance and risk measures  of different sets of portfolios 
mentioned above – each set containing eight portfolios of sizes 15, 30, and 45 respectively – comparing  those 
against each other and the S&P500 index. In addition to S&P500 index, we also  compa re to the Dow Jones 
Industrial Average  and Nasdaq Composite  indices.  For a more comprehensive comparison, we also 
benchmark all portfolios against well -known investment funds from  asset management  companies such as 
Vanguard, Fidelity, and Blackrock. These popular funds are widely acknowledged and used, reflecting a 
broader market performance  in the United States and globally.  The portfolios were assessed on a variety of 
metrics, including returns, volatility, Sharpe ratio, maximum drawdown and value -at-risk among others. For 
out-of-sample testing, we used three distinct time periods. The first period was chosen to be  from 
September  2021 to July  2023, as our in -sample data was prior to September  2021 . The remaining two shorter 
periods, from March  14, 2023,  to July  2023 and May  2023 to July  2023, were chosen to account for the 
potential impacts of the release of GPT -4 and the actual time at which the portfolios were selected using 
GPT -4 prompts. A comprehensive discussion on the comparison of these portfolios, their performances, and 
implications are presented in the results section of the paper.  
 
2 GPT -4 Selection of Trading Universe of Stocks  
To obtain trading universe s of assets, we used the GPT -4 model by providing the following  prompt: "Using 
a range of investing principles taken from leading funds, create a theoretical fund comprising of at least  X 
stocks (mention their tickers) from the S&P 500 with the goal to outp erform the S&P500 index", (where 'X' 
represents 15, 30, or 45  assets). We leveraged the GPT -4 API automation and sent each request 30  times to 
capture a broad range of responses. The GPT -4 API was used to extract stock tickers included in each 
response.  After each iteration , we updated a dictionary consist ing of the stock tickers and their frequency of 
appearances in the GPT -4 output response.  It is also worth noting here that when the above prompt is used 
without the phrase – "comprising of at least X stoc ks", the outputs are portfolios consisting  of about 15  stocks 
on average. That is the reason why we generate portfolios of 15  stocks and its multiple s 30 and 45. The latter 
were considered to generate more diversified portfolios.  O. Romanko, A. Narayan, R.H. Kwon  ChatGPT -based Investment Portfolio Selection  4 
 
When asked to generate a portfolio of at least 15  stocks, GPT -4 produced between 15 to 20  stocks. 
Similarly, the request for 30 and 45  stocks resulted in GPT -4 providing 30 to 35 stocks and 45 to 50  stocks, 
respectively . Stocks that appeared most frequently in GPT -4's responses were subsequently filtered and 
selected  for our trading universe. Figures  1, 2, and 3 illustrate the final selection of the trading universes of 
15, 30, and 45  stocks, respectively. The most frequently mentioned stocks are highlighted in red, while other 
stocks appearing at least once in GPT -4's responses  are marked in blue.  
Note that we had to replace ticker "FB" obtained from GPT -4 with "META ". As the GPT -4 model was 
trained on data prior to September  2021, it was unaware of the renaming of "FB" to "META " that occurred 
in 2022.  
 
Fig. 1  Universe of 15 stocks selected by GPT -4 
 
Fig. 2  Universe of 30  stocks selected by GPT -4 
O. Romanko, A. Narayan, R.H. Kwon  ChatGPT -based Investment Portfolio Selection  5 
 
 
Fig. 3  Universe of 45  stocks selected by GPT -4 
In Table  1 we analy zed overlaps between stocks selected for the universe of 15, 30 and 45  assets. It also 
shows the weights of eac h stock in the "GPT -weighted " portfolios for each of the three universes.  
 
 
 
 
Table  1  Overlaps between assets in three universes  and asset weights  assigned by ChatGPT  
From each of the three trading universes, we  initially  constructed two distinct portfolio types. Firstly, we 
created an "equally -weighted"  (1/𝑛) portfolio, wherein the weight attributed to each asset was calculated as 
the reciprocal of the total number of stocks in that universe (15, 30, or  45). Secondly, we solicited weight 
assignments for these assets from ChatGPT using the following GPT -4 prompt: "Assume you're designing a 
theoretical model portfolio from these S&P500 stocks: {input}. Provide a hypothetical example of how you 
might distribute t he weightage of these stocks (normalized , i.e., weights should add up to  1.00) in the 
portfolio to potentially outperform the S&P500 index. Also mention the underlying strategy or logic which 
O. Romanko, A. Narayan, R.H. Kwon  ChatGPT -based Investment Portfolio Selection  6 
 
you used to assign these weights." Here, the {input} comprised o f the list of X most frequently occurring 
stock tickers as per the earlier prompt.  
ChatGPT rationalized its weight assignments by citing the consideration of various factors such as sector 
diversification, market capitalization, growth potential, and stabi lity among others  (see Appendix  B for more 
details about GPT -4 prompts that we used and obtained responses) . This second portfolio  is referred to as 
the "GPT -weighted " portfolio . Weights of "GPT -weighted"  portfolios are shown in Table  1. 
Figure  4 shows  sector weights for the “GPT -weighted” portfolios of 15, 30 and 45  stocks.  
Fig. 4  Allocation of weights  to sectors  for "GPT -weighted " portfolio of 15 , 30 and 45  stocks  
As the portfolio size increases from 15 to 45  stocks, there is a noticeable trend towards greater 
diversification across various sectors. Despite "Information  Technology " remaining dominant, its proportion 
decreases, allowing sectors like "Industrials ", "Energy ", and "Communication  Services " to play a more 
significant role, thereby potentially mitigating risk and capturing wider market opportunities.  
By now for each of the  three asset universes, we obtained two portfolios – "equally -weighted " and "GPT -
weighted ", where weights of each stock are equal or assigned by ChatGPT. In the next section, we c ompute  
additional portfolios for each universe based on portfolio optimizatio n algorithms.  
 
3 Portfolio Optimization Models and Computational Tests  
3.1 Data  
To compare reward and risk measures across the three trading universes, in addition to the two portfolios 
described in the previous section, we also computed optimal portfolios on the efficient frontier according to 
the Markowitz mean -variance portfolio selection model  with additional constraints. Before we describe our 
computations in more detail, we will discuss data for running our optimization problems and estimati on of 
expected returns and covariances. To align with the GPT -4 training data period, we utilized historical 
financial data up until September  2021 for  our optimization  formulations , subsequently evaluating portfolio 
performance using out -of-sample data fr om September  2021 to July  2023.  
In summary, we used the following data : 
• Weekly data for five years prior to September  2021, utilized for expected return and covariance 
matrix computations (in -sample data for optimization).  As GPT -4 model  was trained on data prior 
to September  2021 , we decided to use historical data prior to September  2021 for calculating 
parameters for the mean -variance portfolio selection model and its extensions.  
O. Romanko, A. Narayan, R.H. Kwon  ChatGPT -based Investment Portfolio Selection  7 
 
• Out-of-sample data used for testing and comparing portfol ios span three distinct periods:  
1) Out-of-sample period  1: from September  2021 to July  2023, representing the total post -training 
data period of GPT -4; 
2) Out-of-sample period  2: from March  14, 2023 (the release date of GPT -4) to July  2023, to gauge 
performance post the model's release ; 
3) Out-of-sample period  3: from May  2023, when we asked ChatGPT to generate the portfolios , 
to July  2023.  
From all stocks included in the S&P500 market index, we obtain ed complete historical timeseries (both 
in-sample and  out-of-sample) for 48 5 stocks  using Yahoo  Finance.  As a result, we restricted our attention to 
only those 48 5 assets.  
3.2 Mean -Variance Portfolio Optimization Model  
By now, ChatGPT  has selected three trading universes:  15, 30 and 45  stocks from S&P500.  We already have 
"equally -weighted" and "GPT -weighted" portfolios for each  of the three universes . We further computed the 
mean -variance efficient frontier for each universe and selected three additional portfolios:  
• Minimum  variance portfolio ( "min Var "); 
• Maximum expected  return portfolio  ("max Ret "); 
• Maximum Sharpe ratio portfolio  ("max Sharpe "). 
We use a set of standard constraints for our portfolio construction process  which include the asset weights 
summing up to 100% and bound constraints on asset weights : 
 Σ𝑖=1𝑛𝑤𝑖=1
𝑙≤𝒘≤𝑢 (1) 
where  𝑛 denotes the number of assets in a universe and 𝒘 is the vector of (unknown) asset weights. To ensure 
a fair comparison of all portfolios, we have added bound constraints  𝑙≤𝒘≤𝑢. Bound constraints ensure 
that each coordinate of vector  𝒘 is between lowe r bound  𝑙 and upper bound  𝑢. Typical bound constraints are 
no short  sale constraints, where 𝑙=0 and 𝑢=1. In our case, l ower bound  𝑙 is set to be approximately half 
of the weight in the equally -weighted portfolio , and  upper bound  𝑢 is set to approximately twice of the weight 
in the equally -weighted portfolio. In summary, the bound constraints are:  
• 0.03≤𝒘≤0.13 for the universe of 15  stocks ; 
• 0.02≤𝒘≤0.07 for the universe of 30  stocks;  
• 0.01≤𝒘≤0.05 for the universe of 45  stocks . 
Boun d constraints ensure that all assets have non-zero weights. As a result, all portfolios that we compare 
will have the same number of assets (15, 30 or  45). 
For the stocks selected by GPT -4, the  portfolio optimization pro blem for computing mean -variance 
efficient frontier subject to constraints  (1) can be defined as:  
 min
𝒘 𝒘𝑇∙𝑸∙𝒘
s.t. 𝝁𝑇∙𝒘≥𝜀
Σ𝑖=1𝑛𝑤𝑖=1
𝑙≤𝒘≤𝑢 (2) O. Romanko, A. Narayan, R.H. Kwon  ChatGPT -based Investment Portfolio Selection  8 
 
where 𝝁 is the vector of expected returns, and  𝑸 is the covariance matrix of returns.  Changing 
hyperparameter 𝜀 (target expected return) allows us to compute mean -variance efficient frontier , where each 
portfolio on the frontier contains exactly 15, 30 or 45  assets.  
Figure  5 shows an efficient  frontier of 15  assets  on in -sample data . For comparison, dashed line shows 
efficient frontier where bound constraints 𝑙≤𝒘≤𝑢 in (2) are replaced with no -short -sale constraints  𝒘≥
0. Figure  6 and Figure  7 show efficient frontiers of 30 and 45  asset universes on the in -sample data.  
 
 
Fig. 5  Risk-reward profiles of portfolios from the u niverse of 15  stocks  (in-sample)  
 
Fig. 6  Risk-reward profiles of portfolios from the universe of 30  stocks (in -sample)  
 
O. Romanko, A. Narayan, R.H. Kwon  ChatGPT -based Investment Portfolio Selection  9 
 
 
Fig. 7  Risk-reward profiles of portfolios from the universe of 45  stocks (in -sample)  
Our observations indicate that both the "GPT -weighted" and "equally -weighted" portfolios are positioned 
near the efficient frontier and are approximately equidistant  to maximum expected return and minimum 
variance portfolios. Notably, the "GPT -weighted" po rtfolio tends to be slightly closer  to the efficient frontier 
as compared to the "equally -weighted" portfolio across all three cases.  
3.3 Mean -Variance Cardinality -Constrained Portfolio Optimization Model  
We considered cardinality constraints in our analys is, as those  ensure  that a portfolio holds a specific number 
of assets. This approach allowed us to thoroughly evaluate ChatGPT's "stock picking" capability by 
exploring all possible combinations of stocks within the S&P500 universe.  
In addition to the already computed portfolios for each universe – the "equally -weighted ", "GPT -
weighted ", "min Var ", "max Ret ", and "max Sharpe " – we also computed  mean -variance efficient frontiers 
incorporating cardinality constraints and minim um/maximum holding constraints. Cardinality constraint in 
portfolio optimization ensures that a portfolio holds a specific number of assets, and for our purposes, we 
have set cardinality at three levels: 15, 30, and 45, out of the available 48 5 assets incl uded in the S&P500 
index. With each cardinality level ( 𝐾 = 15, 30, 45), we compute the efficient frontier, and then select three 
additional portfolios on it: 
• Minimum  variance cardinality -constrained portfolio ( "min Var  card"); 
• Maxim um expected return cardinality -constrained portfolio ( "max Ret  card"); 
• Maxim um Sharpe ratio cardinality -constrained portfolio ( "max Sharpe  card"). 
Using  the convention 00=0, the cardinality function of a vector 𝒘 is defined as card (𝒘)=Σ𝑖=1𝑛𝑤𝑖0. In 
the investment portfolio management context of this study, the cardinality function is interpreted as the 
number of assets held in the portfolio, with non -zero individual weights.  
To restrict the number of assets held in a portfolio to be equal to  𝐾, we add the following cardinality 
constraint to our optimization problem formulation  (2): 
O. Romanko, A. Narayan, R.H. Kwon  ChatGPT -based Investment Portfolio Selection  10 
 
 min
𝒘,𝒛 𝒘𝑇∙𝑸∙𝒘
s.t. 𝝁𝑇∙𝒘≥𝜀
Σ𝑖=1𝑛𝑤𝑖=1
0≤𝒘≤𝑢
Σ𝑖=1𝑛𝑧𝑖=𝐾
𝑙∙𝒛≤𝒘
𝒛∈{0,1} (3) 
Cardinality is a counting function which requires the introduction of binary variables 𝑧𝑖 into the problem 
formulation.  The resulting optimization problem  is known as mixed -integer optimization problem (MIP).  
Efficient frontiers computed by varying the hyperparameter 𝜀 include portfolios with cardinality 𝐾, where 
the weigh t of each asset is between the bounds 𝑙≤𝒘≤𝑢. 
We set cardinality 𝐾 = 15, 30, 45  and comput e three effic ient frontiers for cardinality constrained 
optimization problem  (3). All optimization c omputations are performed in Python with CVXPY module  [6] 
and CPLEX solver  [7]. It took 243, 81 and 70  seconds respectively for the CPLEX  solver  to compute 
efficient frontiers of 100  portfolios for cardinality  15, 30 and 45.  
Cardinality -constrain ed efficient frontiers for the three universes with and without  minimum/maximum 
holding constraints  on asset weights  are shown in Figure  8. Efficient frontiers shown with solid lines are 
computed by optimization formulation  (3), while efficient frontiers shown by dashed curves are computed 
by optimization formulation  (2). 
 
Fig. 8  Risk-reward profiles of portfolios with cardinality 15, 30 and 45  (in-sample)  
As expected, w e observe that the efficient frontiers with bounded asset weights  computed by optimization 
formulation  (2) are located  beneath their cardinality -constrained  counterparts  computed by the 
formulation  (3). It is due to cardinality -constrained optimization  computing optimal portfolios from the 
wider  trading universe of 48 5 stocks , while the formulation  (2) operat es on reduced trading universes of 15, 
30 and 45  stocks selected by ChatGPT.   Performance of these cardinality -constrained portfolios is assessed 
in the next section . 
O. Romanko, A. Narayan, R.H. Kwon  ChatGPT -based Investment Portfolio Selection  11 
 
3.4 Comparison   
To ensure a fair comparison, in the next section of the paper we will examine out -of-sample performances 
of eight distinct portfolios, each composed of 15, 30, or 45  stocks : 
• Strategies type  1: 
1. portfolio from GPT trading universe with weights as signed by GPT -4 model ("GPT-weighted "); 
2. portfolio from GPT trading universe with equal weights ( "equally -weighted "); 
• Strategies type  2: 
3. minimum  variance portfolio  from GPT trading universe  ("min Var "); 
4. maxim um expected return portfolio from GPT trading universe ("max Ret "); 
5. maxim um Sharpe ratio portfolio from GPT trading universe ("max Sharpe "); 
• Strategies type  3: 
6. minimum  variance cardinality -constrained portfolio ( "min Var card "); 
7. maxim um expected return cardinality -constrained portfolio ( "max Ret card "); 
8. maxim um Sharpe ratio cardinality -constrained portfolio ( "max Sharpe card "). 
For out -of-sample comparison, in addition to S&P500 market index,  we also compare with the Dow Jones 
Industrial Average and the Nasdaq Composite  indices.  
In our effort to perform a comprehensive comparison we also compare with  well-known investment funds 
to capture the overall  market 's performance . We take an average of the performance (cumulative returns) of 
these funds  in the out -of-sample periods and represent it by a "Popular Investment Fund s" portfolio : 
• Vanguard Total World Stock ETF (VT) ; 
• Fidelity Large Cap Growth Index (FSPGX) ; 
• Vanguard Total Stock Market ETF (VTI) ; 
• Fidelity SAI U.S. Quality Index Fund (FUQIX) ; 
• Vanguard Mid -Cap Value Index Fund (VMVAX) ; 
• Fidelity Contrafund (FCNTX) ; 
• Vanguard Global Equity Fund (VHGEX) ; 
• Fidelity Worldwide Fund (FWWFX) ; 
• T. Rowe Price Global Stock Fund (PRGSX) ; 
• Blackrock  Advantage Global Fund (MDGCX) ; 
• JPMorgan Large Cap Growth Fund (OLGAX) ; 
• Fidelity Growth and Income (FGIKX) ; 
• Vanguard Dividend Growth (VDIGX) . 
 
4 Results   
While evaluat ing and compar ing our results, we can conclude from  the out -of-sample cumulative return 
comparison that the portfolios constructed from the ChatGPT trading universes outperform those derived 
from cardinality -constrained optimizations , implying that ChatGPT is good at stock pre-selection.  This 
applies acros s all strategies with asset universes of size 15, 30, and 45. Figures  9, 10, and  11 show  cumulative 
returns for the 15  stock portfolios and benchmarks  during out-of-sample period  1, period  2, and  period  3, 
respectively. In Tables  2, 3, and  4, we compare performance and risk metrics of various portfolios within the 
15 stock universe for the corresponding out -of-sample periods. The figures and tables for the 30 and 45  stock 
universes are shown in Appendix  A. O. Romanko, A. Narayan, R.H. Kwon  ChatGPT -based Investment Portfolio Selection  12 
 
 
Fig. 9  Cumulative  returns of portfolios with 15 assets and benchmarks out -of-
sample  (1 September  2021  – 31 July 2023)  
 
 
Table  2  Evaluation metrics (weekly) for portfolios with 15 stock s and benchmark s from 
1 September  2021 to  31 July 2023  
 
O. Romanko, A. Narayan, R.H. Kwon  ChatGPT -based Investment Portfolio Selection  13 
 
 
Fig. 10  Cumulative  returns of portfolios with 15 assets and benchmarks out -of-
sample  (14 March  2023  – 31 July 2023)  
 
 
Table  3  Evaluation metrics  (weekly)  for portfolios with 15 stock s and benchmarks from 14  March  2023 to 
31 July 2023  
 
O. Romanko, A. Narayan, R.H. Kwon  ChatGPT -based Investment Portfolio Selection  14 
 
 
 
Fig. 11  Cumulative  returns of portfolios with 15  assets and benchmarks out -of-
sample  (1 May 2023  – 31 July 2023)  
 
 
Table  4  Evaluation metrics (weekly) for portfolios with 15 stock s and benchmarks  from 1  May 2023 to 
31 July 2023  
Across different out-of-sample time periods and portfolios of 15, 30, and 45  stocks, we can observe some 
distinct patterns.  Consistently, the "Max Ret " and "Max Sharpe " strategies were observed to provide the 
highest cumulative returns. However, these higher returns we re often paired with increased risk measure s 
(volatility , max drawdown, value -at-risk), indicating a greater level of risk associated with these portfolios. 
O. Romanko, A. Narayan, R.H. Kwon  ChatGPT -based Investment Portfolio Selection  15 
 
In addition, "Max  Ret" and "Max  Sharpe" strategies have the highest Sharpe ratios indicating that those 
portfolios have the best out-of-sample performance per unit of risk (volatility).  On the other hand, the 
"Min Var" strategy generally displayed the lowest weekly volatility, making it the least risky  option despite 
often  producing  lower returns.  It was also noted that the "Max Ret - card" strategy, while showing high 
volatility, typically failed to produce high returns. This trend was especially evident  in the 30 and 45  stock 
portfolios . The "GPT -weighted " and "equally-weight ed" portfolios provided solid performance, generally 
falling be tween  the high  returns -high risk "Max Ret" and "Max Sharpe " strategies, and the low  risk-
low return "Min Var" strategy.  
In essence, while "Max Ret" and "Max Sharpe " strategies offered a potential for high returns  and had 
superior Sharpe ratios , those also carried substantial risk. Investors seeking stability over high returns would 
likely be better served by the "Min Var" strategy. Those seeking a balance between risks and return s might 
consider "GPT -weighted " or "equally-weight ed" portfolios.  
Figure  12 compares the three top -performing portfolios ( "GPT -weighted ", "Max Ret" and "Max Sharpe ") 
of the three universes . We observe that the 15  stock portfolios perform the best  with respect to cumulative 
return , followed by the 30  stock portfolios and the relatively worse performance is shown by the 45  stock  
portfolios. This leads us to conclude that the lesser the number of stocks in the portfolio  (out of sizes  15, 30 
and 45) , the better the cumulative return . The 15 stock portfolios demonstrated superior performance  and 
stability , possibly due to a well -selected group of stocks  that have stronger fundamentals . On the other hand, 
the 45  stock portfolios, while more diversified, may have been affected by lower -performing assets, resulting 
in relatively worse overall performance.  
 
Fig. 12  Cumulative returns for "GPT -weighted ", "Max Ret" and "Max Sharpe " portfolios with 15, 30 and 
45 stocks  
O. Romanko, A. Narayan, R.H. Kwon  ChatGPT -based Investment Portfolio Selection  16 
 
In analyzing the overall performance of the various strategies, it becomes clear that portfolios on the 
Markowitz mean -variance efficient frontier, specifically derived from the trading universes selected by 
ChatGPT, consistently out perform  others for all out -of-sample time periods . These portfolios, optimized for 
maximum  returns or maximum risk -adjusted returns, were notable for their superior performance, exhibiting 
a fine balance between risk and reward.  
In contrast, the ChatGPT strategies, both "equally -weighted " and "GPT -weighted ", demonstrated less 
optimal outcomes. This may suggest that while the AI has capabilities in selecting profitable stocks, its ability 
to optimally distribute portfolio weights could benefit from further refinement. Interestingly, the cardinality -
constrained optimized portfolios fell short of e xpectations. Despite their intent to enhance diversification and 
improve stability  by limiting the number of assets, th ose did not yield high returns  out-of-sample , suggesting 
potential overfitting to the in -sample data. Robust parameter estimation or applying robust mean -variance 
optimization may improve out-of-sample risk-return profiles of portfolios produced by cardinality -
constrained optimization.  
Despite this, it's remarka ble that the majority of implemented  strategies outperformed traditional 
benchmarks, such as S&P500, underscoring the potential of integrating AI capabilities like ChatGPT into 
investment strateg ies design. Moreover, strategies that augmented performance o f ChatGPT's selected 
portfolios through the application of optimization techniques, saw a significant improvement in risk -return 
profiles . This showcases the value of supplementing AI capabilities with established financial theories and 
techniques.  
 
5 Conc lusions  
Utilizing ChatGPT as a "standalone " investment advisor may not necessarily be a good idea due to a number 
of limitations . First,  the generative  model s "hallucinate " and hence outputs produced  by those require 
rigorous validation. It makes an implementation of robust validation checks on its recommendations  a 
requirement for practical use . At the minimum, ob taining reliable investment universes involves making 
multiple requests to ChatGPT, assessing the results, and using a majority voting system to finalize a universe  
of stocks . Second , it is imperative to ensure that the assets recommended are indeed part o f an index that we 
requested, e.g., S&P500. Additionally, other less obvious checks and validations of ChatGPT output may 
need to be performed.  
On the other hand, it is worth noting that ChatGPT basically leverages a combined sentiment from the 
period in w hich it was trained, which may not always align with the most recent market data, at least for 
now. However, when ChatGPT's output is combined with traditional quantitative models, there is a 
significant potential to improve risk-reward profiles of inv estment portfolios. By utilizing investment 
universes generated by ChatGPT and performing portfolio optimization on  top of those, we can obtain better 
performing  investment portfolios  than those obtained exclusively using ChatGPT or portfolio optimization  
algorithms  without ChatGPT . 
In summary, our findings lead to two key conclusions. Firstly, the superior performance of ChatGPT 
portfolios compared to the cardinality -constrained port folios reinforces the notion that ChatGPT excels in 
"stock picking ". Secondly, when combined with rigorous validation and traditional quantitative financial 
modeling, such as portfolio optimization, ChatGPT proves to be a valuable tool for investment. Thes e hybrid 
solutions offer the potential for more efficient and effective approaches to practical investing, presenting 
themselves as superior alternatives to current robo -advising strategies.  
 O. Romanko, A. Narayan, R.H. Kwon  ChatGPT -based Investment Portfolio Selection  17 
 
Acknowledgements     The authors' research was partially supported by the Mitacs  Globalink Research 
Internship p rogram  and by SS&C  Technologies (SS&C  Algorithmics). We would like to thank Rafael 
Mendoza -Arriaga from SS&C  Algorithmics for his helpful suggestions.  
 
Appendix A  
Figures  13, 14, and 15 illustrate out-of-sample cumulative returns for the 30 stock universe , and Figures  16, 
17 and 18 for the 45 stock universe  during period  1, period  2, and period  3, respectively. In Tables  5, 6, and 
7, we compare out-of-sample performance and risk metrics of various portfolios within the 30 stock universe , 
and in Tables  8, 9 and 10 comparison for the 45  stock universe  is provided . 
 
Fig. 13  Cumulative returns of portfolios with 30 assets and benchmarks out-of-
sample  (1 September  2021  – 31 July 2023)  
 
 
Table  5  Evaluation metrics (weekly) for portfolios with 30 stock s  and benchmarks from 1  Sept 2021 to 
31 July 2023  
O. Romanko, A. Narayan, R.H. Kwon  ChatGPT -based Investment Portfolio Selection  18 
 
 
 
Fig. 14  Cumulative returns of portfolios with 30 assets and benchmarks out -of-
sample  (14 March  2023  – 31 July 2023)  
 
 
Table  6  Evaluation metrics (weekly) for portfolios with 30 stock s and benchmarks from 1 4 March 2023 to 
31 July 2023  
 
O. Romanko, A. Narayan, R.H. Kwon  ChatGPT -based Investment Portfolio Selection  19 
 
 
Fig. 15  Cumulative  returns of portfolios with 30 assets and benchmarks out -of-
sample  (1 May 2023  – 31 July 2023)  
 
 
Table  7  Evaluation metrics (weekly) for portfolios with 30 stock s and benchmarks  from 1  May 2023 to 
31 July 2023  
 
O. Romanko, A. Narayan, R.H. Kwon  ChatGPT -based Investment Portfolio Selection  20 
 
 
Fig. 16  Cumulative  returns of portfolios with 45 assets and benchmarks out -of-
sample  (1 September  2021  – 31 July 2023)  
 
 
Table  8  Evaluation metrics (weekly) for portfolios with 45 stock s and benchmarks  from 
1 September  2021 to 31 July 2023  
O. Romanko, A. Narayan, R.H. Kwon  ChatGPT -based Investment Portfolio Selection  21 
 
 
Fig. 17  Cumulative returns of portfolios with 45 assets and benchmarks out -of-
sample  (14 March  2023  – 31 July 2023)  
 
 
Table  9  Evaluation metrics (weekly) for portfolios with 45 stock s and benchmarks  from 1 4 March 2023 to 
31 July 2023  
O. Romanko, A. Narayan, R.H. Kwon  ChatGPT -based Investment Portfolio Selection  22 
 
 
Fig. 18  Cumulative returns of portfolios with 45 assets and benchmarks out -of-
sample  (1 May 2023  – 31 July 2023)  
 
Table  10  Evaluation metrics (weekly) for portfolios with 45 stock s and benchmarks  from 1  May 2023 to 
31 July 2023  
 
Appendix B 
The following prompts were used to extract trading universes and "GPT -weighted " portfolio s of stocks from 
GPT -4: 
• Prompt  1: "Using a range of investing principles taken from leading funds, create a theoretical fund 
comprising of at  least X stocks (mention their tickers) from the S&P500 with the goal to outperform 
the S&P500 index " (X is 15, 30 or  45 for the three cases) ; 
• Prompt  2: "Extract only the ticker symbols of the stocks comprising the fund from the previous 
response: - '{input} '. In your res ponse to this prompt, list only the ticker symbols separated by 
spaces " (here the output response of prompt  1 was used in place of {input}) ; 
O. Romanko, A. Narayan, R.H. Kwon  ChatGPT -based Investment Portfolio Selection  23 
 
• Prompt  3: "Assume you're designing a theoretical model portfolio from these S&P500 stocks: 
{input}. Provide a hypothetical example of how you might distribute the weightage of these stocks 
(normalized , i.e., weights should add up to 1.00) in the portfolio to potentially outperform the 
S&P500 index. Also mention the underlying strategy or logic which you used to as sign these 
weights " (here the output response of prompt 2 was used in place of {input}) ; 
• Prompt  4: "Extract tickers of stocks and corresponding weights as a single comma ',' separated string, 
with the weights expressed as floats: '{input}'  " (here the output response of prompt  3 was used in 
place of {input}).  
Note  1: Prompts  1 and 2 were used together and this was iterated 30  times for each of the three cases.  
Note  2: In some cases, the weights assigned by Chat GPT may not add up to exactly  1 (it was 1.0 5 in the case 
of 15  stocks for our experiment , see Figure  20). In such cases, we normalize d weights such that th ose add up 
to exactly  1. This ensures that the relative weight distribution remains the same . 
Figure  19 show s an output response of GPT -4 model in the ChatGPT user interface for prompt  1 (X = 15). 
 
Fig. 19  An output response of ChatGPT (GPT -4) for prompt  1 with X = 15 
O. Romanko, A. Narayan, R.H. Kwon  ChatGPT -based Investment Portfolio Selection  24 
 
Figure  20 shows an output response of GPT -4 model in the ChatGPT user interface for prompt  3 (for the 
stocks obtained in the output seen  in Figure  19). 
 
Fig. 20  An output response of ChatGPT (GPT -4) for prompt  3 with X = 15 
Note  3: The outputs shown in Figure  19 and Figure  20 represent responses obtained through the GPT -4 user 
interface for the corresponding prompts used in the experiment. These outputs may differ from the responses 
obtained through the GPT -4 API, which were used in the actual experiment. The difference is due to the 
probabilistic nature of the GPT -4 model, which can generate varying responses to the same prompt between 
different calls or interfaces.  
 
O. Romanko, A. Narayan, R.H. Kwon  ChatGPT -based Investment Portfolio Selection  25 
 
References  
1. Ali, H., Aysan,  A.F.: What will ChatGPT Revolutionize in Financial Industry? (March 28, 2023). 
Available at SSR N: http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4403372  (2023)  
2. Biswas,  S., Joshi,  N., Mukhopadhyaya,  J.N.: ChatGPT in Investment Decision Making: An 
Introductory Discussion.  Technical Report . http://dx.doi.org/10.131 40/RG.2.2.36417.43369  (2023)  
3. Cao, L.: ChatGPT and the Future of Investment Management. CFA Institute Blogs. 
http://blogs.cfainstitute.org/investor/2023/02/24/chatgpt -and-the-future -of-investment -
management/  (2023)  
4. Cascio, M.: Build an Investment Portfolio with ChatGPT. Medium, Data Driven Investor. 
http://medium.datadriveninvestor.com/build -an-investment -portfoli o-with-chatgpt -12482bb88a76  
(2022)  
5. Chang,  T.-J., Meade,  N., Beasley,  J.E., Sharaiha,  Y.M. : Heuristics for cardinality constrained 
portfolio optimisation . Computers & Operations Research, 27 (13),  pp. 1271 -1302. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/S0305 -0548(99)00074 -X (2000)  
6. Diamond , S., Boyd , S.: CVXPY: A Python -embedded modeling language for convex optimization. 
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17 (1), pp.  2909 –2913. 
https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/2946645.3007036  (2016)  
7. IBM : IBM ILOG CPLEX 22.1.1 User Manual. IBM Corp. http://www.ibm.com/docs/en/icos/22.1.1  
(2022)  
8. Ko, H., Lee, J.: Can ChatGPT Improve Investment Decision? From a Portfolio Management 
Perspective.  Available at SSRN:  http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4390529  (2023)  
9. Koa,  H., Leea,  J.: The Role of ChatGPT in Portfolio Management. Wall Street Insider Report. 
http://www.wallstreetinsiderreport.com/p/the -role-of-chatgpt -in-portfolio  (2023)  
10. Lo, A.W., Singh,  M., ChatGPT:  From ELIZA to ChatGPT: The Evolution of Natural Language 
Processing and Financial Applications. Journal of Portfolio Management,  49 (7), pp.  201-235. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3905/jpm.2023.1.512  (2023)  
11. Lopez -Lira,  A., Tang,  Y.: Can ChatGPT Forecast Stock Price Movements? Return Predictability and 
Large Language Models . Available at SSRN:  http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4412788  (2023)  
12. Markowitz,  H.M. : Portfolio Selection . Journal of Finance.  7 (1), pp.  77-91. 
http://doi.org/10.2307/2975974  (1952)  
13. Niszczota,  P., Abbas,  S.: GPT as a Financial Advisor.  Available at SSRN:  
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4384861  (2023)  
14. O, M .: How to Nudge ChatGPT to Build an Investment Portfolio for Long -Term Success. Medium, 
Medium , The Generator . http://medium.com/the -generator/chatgpt -please -build -an-investment -
portfolio -for-me-can-you-e988170d1039  (2023)  
15. OpenAI  : GPT -4 Technical Report.  arXiv:2303.08774. http://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2303.08774  
(2023)  
16. Sharpe,  W.F.: Mutual Fund Performance. Journal of Business. 39 (1), pp.  119-138. 
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2351741  (1966)  
17. Zaremba,  A., Demir,  E.: ChatGPT: Unlocking the Future of NL P in Finance. Available at SSRN:  
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4323643  (2023)  
 