Alpha-GPT: Human-AI Interactive Alpha Mining for Quantitative
Investment
Saizhuo Wang∗†
The Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology
Hong Kong SAR
swangeh@connect.ust.hkHang Yuan∗†
The Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology
Hong Kong SAR
hyuanak@connect.ust.hkLeon Zhou†
Columbia University
USA
Leon.zhou@columbia.edu
Lionel M. Ni
The Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology (Guangzhou)
China
ni@ust.hkHeung-Yeung Shum
IDEA Research
China
hshum@idea.edu.cnJian Guo‡
IDEA Research
China
guojian@idea.edu.cn
ABSTRACT
One of the most important tasks in quantitative investment re-
search is mining new alphas (effective trading signals or factors).
Traditional alpha mining methods, either hand-crafted factor syn-
thesizing or algorithmic factor mining (e.g., search with genetic
programming), have inherent limitations, especially in implement-
ing the ideas of quants. In this work, we propose a new alpha mining
paradigm by introducing human-AI interaction, and a novel prompt
engineering algorithmic framework to implement this paradigm
by leveraging the power of large language models. Moreover, we
develop Alpha-GPT, a new interactive alpha mining system frame-
work that provides a heuristic way to “understand” the ideas of
quant researchers and outputs creative, insightful, and effective
alphas. We demonstrate the effectiveness and advantage of Alpha-
GPT via a number of alpha mining experiments.
1 INTRODUCTION
A trading alpha [ 1] is a financial signal or a function with predictive
power over excess return or risk, and they are usually expressed
via symbolic rules or formulas (machine learning alphas are getting
more popular recently but they are not discussed in this work).
Most research work in quantitative investment focuses on how to
find good alphas. See [ 2] for a number of such formulaic alphas
(e.g.,−𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒−𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑛
(ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ−𝑙𝑜𝑤)+0.001computes the increase from open price to
close price relative to the intraday volatility, and the negative sign
indicates a potential mean-reversion effect).
Traditionally, alpha mining has two paradigms (Figure 1). The
first paradigm relies on manual modeling. Quant researchers at-
tempt to translate their ideas/intuitions about financial markets into
formulaic alphas, test their effectiveness and significance through
backtest experiments, and analyze the reasons of success and fail-
ure. Usually, this process is repeated for many rounds to improve
the performance of alphas. The success of this paradigm depends
heavily on the talent and expertise of individuals and suffers from
the problems of inefficiency and labor cost. On the other hand,
the second paradigm seeks alphas through search algorithms such
∗Both authors contributed equally to this research.
†Work done during internship at IDEA Research.
‡Corresponding authoras genetic programming [ 3]. Since the search space, composed of
all possible combinations for hundreds of operators and operands
(features), is incredibly large, it is extremely compute-intensive to
find satisfactory alphas during the alpha search process.
Both of these paradigms exhibit common shortcomings. Firstly,
it is a difficult process to find a precise and concise formulaic ex-
pression that encapsulates one’s ideas about trading signals or
observed trading opportunities and patterns. Examples include the
formulaic representation of technical analysis patterns such as As-
cending Triangles [ 4] and Elliott Wave Theory [ 5], which exist but
are hard to discover. Secondly, understanding and interpreting a
large number of alphas selected by search algorithms is especially
time-consuming and labor-intensive. Lastly, it is unreasonable to
expect creative and effective alphas to come from the stroke-of-
genius by researchers or the brute-force search by algorithms, but
rather, it often comes from a repeated process of experimentation-
and-analysis. However, designing and modifying the parameters
and search configurations of algorithmic alpha mining systems is
usually a menial task for researchers.
To address these challenges, we propose the third alpha min-
ing paradigm which enhances human-AI interaction to improve
the effectiveness and efficiency of alpha research. Based on this
new paradigm, we propose the architecture of an interactive al-
pha mining system, termed Alpha-GPT . This system incorporates
large language models (LLM) as a mediator between quantitative
researchers and alpha search. Alpha-GPT has three key advantages.
First, it can interpret users’ trading ideas and translate them into
fitting expressions. Secondly, Alpha-GPT can quickly summarize
top-performing alphas in natural language for ease of understand-
ing. And finally, the user can then suggest modifications to the alpha
search which the model will automatically make to future rounds
of alpha mining. This greatly simplifies the workflow (Figure 2)
and allows the user to approach alpha mining from a high-level
standpoint (in terms of abstract ideas).
Our contributions in this work can be summarized from these
standpoints:
•We define a new paradigm for alpha mining utilizing human-AI
interaction to improve the effectiveness of alpha research.arXiv:2308.00016v1  [q-fin.CP]  31 Jul 2023•Manual alpha mining•Intuition, talent and experience•Labor-intensive and costlyParadigm 1•Algorithmic alpha mining•Configuration of search space•Compute-intensiveParadigm 2•Interactive alpha mining•Human-AI interaction•Natural language understandingParadigm 3
Figure 1: Evolution of alpha mining techniques.
•We propose AlphaBot, an algorithm with domain knowledge
compilation and decompilation methods to employ the LLM as a
mediator for human-AI interaction.
•We develop Alpha-GPT, a systematic framework incorporating
AlphaBot to realize our proposed paradigm and a tool for quanti-
tative researchers.
2 USER INTERFACE OF ALPHA-GPT
In Figure 3 we introduce the user interface (UI) of Alpha-GPT, which
is composed of three main components: Session Manager, Dialog
Box, and the Alpha Mining Dashboard.
Dialog Box : Users input their trading ideas and thoughts into
the dialog box. In response, generated seed alphas, alpha searching
progress, the final report of alpha mining, as well as the performance
of the generated alphas, are all organized into system messages
that provide comprehensive feedback. Users can then analyze the
results and provide further direction for alpha mining, and this
dialog continues until effective alphas are found.
Mining Session Manager : Alpha-GPT features a session-based
user interface that stores past interaction history via the session
manager. These sessions also serve to organize user-generated data,
which can then be used to further enhance the system’s perfor-
mance.
Alpha Mining Dashboard : On the right half, the dashboard is
used to display and analyze alpha mining results. It provides users
with more detailed descriptions of the session. Experiment Mon-
itor displays the alpha mining experiment progress and current
system load as well as all historical alphas generated during a ses-
sion. If a specific alpha is selected, its performances are plotted and
visualized on the Analytic Panel . The available plotting features
include a fitness curve across generations for genetic programming,
a backtest curve for a single alpha, and other peripheral analy-
ses such as IC distribution and Signal decay. Furthermore, Alpha
Dashboard includes one-click storage and deployment, enabling
further application and analysis downstream.
3 ARCHITECTURE AND TECHNOLOGY
CHALLENGES
Figure 4 shows the system framework we proposed for the interac-
tive alpha mining paradigm by distilling and abstracting from the
architecture design of Alpha-GPT. Since UI has been introduced in
Section 2, we only introduce the design idea and technical challenge
of other modules behind the system.3.1 AlphaBot Layer
AlphaBot is the key layer of Alpha-GPT, as it plays a mediator role
in human-AI interaction. Specifically, this layer consists of four
functional modules: 1) Knowledge compiler automatically con-
verts the intents/ideas/thoughts of quantitative researchers into
domain-specific prompts and instructions for an LLM query; 2)
LLM provides APIs or local deployment options for mainstream
large language models such as GPT-4; 3) Thought decompiler
translates the natural language output of an LLM into a configu-
ration understandable by the algorithmic alpha mining layer; 4)
Knowledge Library incorporates extra knowledge, information,
literature and data about alpha mining to improve the performance
and accuracy of LLMs.
3.1.1 Knowledge compiler. On domain-specific tasks like alpha
mining, a lot of user requests will include terminology that can
only be found in finance. Without further context, a traditional
LLM would be unable to understand the meaning behind the inputs.
This then introduces the need for the knowledge compiler mod-
ule. Leveraging the in-context learning capability of LLM [ 10], the
module enhances the original user request by providing additional
context and clarifying keywords in prompts [11]. Specific phrases
like “ you are a quant researcher developing formulaic alphas ” help
narrow the scope of possible responses to answers more suited for
factor mining.
Since the alpha expressions must also be in a certain format
to be valid, there is a section in the prompt with each possible
component of an expression along with an explanation of how
it can be utilized (e.g. “high_1D”: highest intraday price of stocks ).
This addition helps the LLM correlate the user intentions with
certain functions that can fulfill that goal, and helps ensure that the
output will be valid. Because this terminology is applicable to the
wider finance domain, this portion of the prompt is also used in
the thought decompiler to prevent hallucinations. Such a module
is required to allow users to make requests in natural language
without the ambiguities involved.
3.1.2 Large Language Model. There are currently two main ways
of utilizing LLMs, each with their own characteristics.
•Online Request : A swath of companies offer access to their pre-
built large language models through APIs. These are products
that charge a nominal amount per set amount of tokens and
include GPT, Claude, and Bard, to name a few. One advantage of
2System OutputAlpha EvaluationDialog/MessageTop AlphasInterpretationRisk EvaluationBacktest Results1. ts_ir(close, ts_delta(..2. grouped_demean(…3. ts_rank(returns, 5)Mainly capture price momentums, suggested industry neutralization to reduce risk exposure …Knowledge CompilationPrompt TemplateExternal Memory
## Specification…## Instructions…## Examples{retrieved_memory}Now, please write me at least 10 such expressions.alpha001expr: cwise_mul(-1, ts_corr(…desc:the alpha expression aims to capture the correlation between changes in trading volume …## Trading Ideas{user_input}alpha013expr: cwise_mul(-1, rank(…desc: The idea is that stocks with stronger momentum and higher correlation between price and volume are more likely to experience continued price movements
Computing and EvaluationEvaluationComputingexpr: ts_ema(x, 5, 0.5)fitness:train_ic: 0.02303test_ic: 0.01945expr: amountfitness:train_ic: 0.02105test_ic: 0.01904expr: ts_corr(volume, close, 5)fitness:train_ic: 0.01984test_ic: 0.01882expr:grouped_demean(ts_delta(close, 3), sw1_mask)fitness:train_ic: 0.01723test_ic: 0.01655Alpha SearchingGP ConfigurationGenerated Alphaopeartorconfig[ {’cwise_mul’: 3}, {‘ts_ema’: 2}, ……]terminal config[ {‘name’: ‘close_1D’,‘price_degree’: 1, ‘is_unitless’: False }, {‘name’: ‘c2c_1D’, ‘is_unitless’: True, ……]gpconfig{‘selection’: ‘tournament_k’,‘num_rounds’: 20,‘prob_crossover’: 0.6,……}generation_1:1. greater(ts_rank_diff(c2c_1D, c2c_1D.shift(1)), 0) 2. ……generation_2:1.grouped_min(ts_delta(volume_1D,1),sw1_1D)2. ……………generation_20:1.ts_ema(ts_delta(volume_1D,1),10,0.5)2. …Reasoning and Thought De-compilation
Initial AlphasDescriptionFormulaIDIt measures the standardized change in the magnitude of smoothed price trendszscore(ts_delta(ts_ema(ts_rank(close,10),10,0.5),1))01This expression calculated percentage change in ema of volume. Capturesvolume change momentumdiv(ts_delta(ts_ema(close, 10, 0.5), 1), close)02It captures volume smoothed trend confirmationts_delta(ts_rank(ts_delta(volume, 1), 10, 1)03………User InputHuman-AI Conversation1.Please exploit momentum effect in volume and price data to find some patterns that are useful for trading.2.Apply smoothing techniques to make the signal more robust.3.Add some confirmation signals to make the signal more robust.4.Use some other techniques to make the signal more robust.Search Directions{prob_crossover: 0.4, prob_point_mutation: 0.25, ……} Expressiongreater(ts_argmin(ts_delta(close, 1), 5), 0)  and ts_zscore(volume, 5) > 2Entry point
LLM Input1. Price Trend Confirmation Smoothed```pythonzscore(ts_delta(ts_ema(ts_rank(close, 10), ……)```This expression calculates the exponential moving average of the 1-day delta of volume over a 10-day window. It captures the momentum in…LLM OutputSystem PromptYou are a quant researcher ……## Instructionswrite python expressions with…## Specificationsoperators: …operands: …User messageTrading idea1. Utilizes …Examples-alpha001```expr```Description: …-alpha003……RetrieveCombineCombine
Response
CombineRequestRequest
minus(div(cwise_max(minus(high_1D,open_1D),…
Backtest
EvaluateFigure 2: Alpha-GPT internal working pipeline: After a user inputs their ideas, the system goes into the knowledge compilation module.
It uses external memory to pull similar examples, and combines them into the system prompt. The module passes everything to the LLM
which creates valid alpha expressions and config files. These alphas are evaluated via Alpha Search, and results are presented to the user
along with an interpretation provided by the Thoughts Decompiler.
APIs is that it allows for ease of use, and removes the need for
computing power.
•Local Deployment : LLMs can also be developed locally from
the ground up. This approach allows greater customization in
how the model functions. They can be pre-trained on specific
datasets to align them towards certain purposes. This involves
domain fine-tuning by learning on relevant documents, and also
reinforcement learning from human feedback [ 12]. The result is
an LLM that is specifically built for a subset of tasks. However, the
user then requires a large amount of computing power [ 13,14]
to train and update these models.
3.1.3 Thought Decompiler. There is a significant gap between LLM
responses and the desired output structure in alpha mining. Specifi-
cally, the gaps can be summarized as challenges from the following
perspectives:
•Nature language to structured data : We need to convert LLM
response from natural language to structured data. For each LLM
response message, we need to extract a list of expression blocks
from their raw outputs. And each expression block follows a
certain organization style such as its short name, expression, and
a paragraph of natural language description.
•Token size limit : Since most state-of-the-art LLMs apply a
Transformer-based architecture with self-attention mechanisms,
limits on the input sequence length (number of tokens) is usuallyAlgorithm 1: LLM Reasoning and Thought Decompiling
Input: Input message history 𝐻, Expected number of alphas
𝑁, expected minimum number of alpha per round 𝜃,
retry limit𝜏
Output: List of generated alphas 𝑙
1𝑙←[] ;
2while len(l) < N do
3𝑚←get_llm_response(𝐻);
4𝑟←parse_exprs(𝑚);
5 iflen(𝑟)<𝜃then
6 continue ;
7𝑣,˜𝑣←validate(𝑟);
8𝑙←𝑙+𝑣;
9 for𝐼in{1..𝜏}do
10𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑟𝑦 _𝑚𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑎𝑔𝑒←make_retry_prompt (𝐻,˜𝑣);
11𝑣,˜𝑣←retry_and_validate (𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑟𝑦 _𝑚𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑎𝑔𝑒);
12𝑙←𝑙+𝑣;
13𝐻←update_prompt(𝑙)
14return l;
a very common concern. In this way, both inputs and outputs
of LLMs have an upper bound for their lengths. This may cause
3Figure 3: User interface of Alpha-GPT. Five modules of the UI are annotated as: (A) Dialog Box, (B) Mining Session Manager, (C)
Experiment Monitor, (D) Analytic Panel, and (E) Alpha Dashboard
two issues: 1). We cannot keep sending full conversation history
to LLMs since it will exceed the input token size limit. 2). The
size of a single LLM response is limited, meaning that we can
only get a limited number of expressions per message.
To address these issues, we propose an iterative LLM reasoning
procedure (Algorithm 1). We apply a parser based on regular ex-
pressions to parse LLM outputs. For each LLM-generated alpha,
we validate its correctness both syntactically and semantically. We
adopt an abstract syntax tree parser for syntax checking, and for
semantic correctness, we evaluate this expression with mock data
and runtime context to capture any exceptions being thrown out.In practice, the proportion of correct alphas might be low (only 4
out of 10 alphas generated per round), making the alpha generation
process inefficient. Meanwhile, since the conversation history is
appended to LLM inputs, these incorrect expressions may also affect
the generation process that follows. Hence, we apply an iterative
correcting procedure where we prompt the LLM to re-generate
incorrect alphas. Moreover, to address the problem of exceeded
token size limit, at each round we dynamically check if the token
size limit is exceeded, and if so, the input message will be truncated
and reorganized to reduce the number of tokens.
3.1.4 Knowledge Library. As mentioned in Section 3.1.1, few-shot
in-context learning requires an external memory that supports
4User Interface
Algorithmic Alpha MiningSession ManagerDialog BoxAnalytic Panel
Alpha Search EnhancementAlpha DiversificationValidity CheckingGenetic ProgrammingOverfitting Prevention
Backtestingand EvaluationVectorized ComputationOrderbook-level SimulationTimestampingAlpha SelectionDeduplicationDecorrelationImportance Scoring
Alpha DeploymentStream-Batch UnificationDependency ManagementAlpha VerificationAlphaBotKnowledge CompilerKnowledge Library
Thought De-compilerLarge Language ModelsOnline RequestLocal DeploymentDemonstration RetrievalIntention ParsingInstruction PromptingAlpha SpecificationAlpha BaseExpert KnowledgeLiterature CollectionHistorical SessionsOutput ParsingConfiguration SynthesisValidation & CorrectionMessage RefinementGPTClaudeBardDistributed InferenceQuantizationAlignment
Alpha ComputationAccelerationExperiment MonitorAlpha Dashboard
…
Regex=r"\*\*(.*?)\*\*\n+```python\n(.*?)\n```\n+(.*?)(?=\n\*\*|$)"
QuoteData PreprocessingOrder BookTextFinancial Statement
SQL DatabasesNoSQL DatabasesTime-series Databases
In-memory Databases
ComputationAcceleration Streaming AlgorithmsData PartitioningGPU AccelerationSIMD / SIMTMemory OptimizationMultithreading
Figure 4: Alpha-GPT system architecture. Part of this figure is cited from [6–9].
efficient retrieval of demonstrations relevant to trading ideas. In
Alpha-GPT, we design a protocol for organizing contents from
across multiple sources. These range from an existing collection of
alpha expressions to financial literature. When the user makes a
request, the knowledge library encodes that query, and finds similar
documents that it can incorporate into the prompt as examples.
3.2 Algorithmic Alpha Mining Layer
This layer serves a search enhancement function in Alpha-GPT.
Specifically, it implements an algorithmic alpha mining workflow
by taking seed alphas and improving them with the received search
commands and configurations from AlphaBot, and pushes the most
appropriate alphas back to AlphaBot. It consists of four modules:thealgorithmic alpha search module generates alpha candidates
according to the commands from AlphaBot, qualified alphas are
selected from these candidates using the evaluation and back-
testing module, these alphas are further pruned according to a
specific prediction target (e.g., contribution to the return of future
10 days) in the alpha selection module, and the final alphas are
“one-click” deployed by the alpha deployment module to guaran-
tee the smoothness and correctness of real-time computing during
online trading.
3.2.1 Alpha Search Enhancement. The most popular alpha search
algorithm used in industry is genetic programming (GP), which
starts from a number of alpha seeds and iteratively selects formulaic
5alphas expressed by trees using random crossing and mutation
subtrees according to the fitness of a scoring function. However,
GP currently suffers from three problems: 1) Overfitting , which is
extremely dangerous for quantitative trading. This can be mitigated
by strategies such as out-of-sample evaluation incorporated in GP
iterations, fit regularization to reduce function complexity, and
early stopping of iterations. These methods help ensure alphas
generalize well beyond training data, improving their reliability.
2)Loss of diversity in alphas may result in the aggregation and
accumulation of investment risk and increase the uncertainty of
returns. Alpha diversification can be realized by enforcing more
constraints in GP’s iteration process, and it helps discover robust
alpha factors that are resilient to changing market conditions. 3)
Invalid alphas are easily generated by GP. For example, 𝑙𝑜𝑔(0)and√
−5, or a sum of two values with incompatible units (e.g, volume +
close). Incorporating a rule base encompassing mathematical rules,
unit consistency rule and financial domain-specific rules could
regulate alpha expression generation.
3.2.2 Evaluation and Backtesting. The most straightforward method
of evaluating alpha is through backtesting, which reveals the al-
pha’s specific performance in an investment strategy. This process,
however, introduces three significant challenges: 1) Introduction
of future information : information from a further point in time
when backtesting could have disastrous consequences on result ac-
curacy. To mitigate this, Timestamping is used to assign a time label
to each piece of input data. This technique allows the backtesting
system to more accurately replicate market conditions and validate
test results, thereby enhancing the reliability of alpha evaluation.
2)Estimation of transaction costs: conventional coarse-grained
backtesting cannot accurately measure transaction costs, which is
crucial for short-term alphas. To solve this, we conduct a simulation-
based [ 15] backtest with trade matching rules using more detailed
data, such as order book level data, for selected alphas. This en-
ables us to model how transaction costs and market price impact
alphas at a microstructure level. 3) The computational cost : the
compute-power necessary for alpha mining is also significant, and
we address this problem in the computation acceleration layer.
3.2.3 Alpha Selection. The Alpha Selection module furthers the
selection process in the following ways: 1) Deduplication and
Decorrelation: new alphas need to be distinct from existing ones,
but calculating pair-wise similarity between large amounts of al-
phas can be time-consuming. Algorithms like KD-Tree, Locality-
Sensitive Hashing (LSH) [ 16], or Approximate Nearest Neighbors
(ANN) can swiftly determine each prospective alpha’s maximum
correlation with others in the pool. 2) Importance Scoring: while
an alpha’s IC score and backtest may reflect individual performance,
in real scenarios, multiple alphas are combined together in invest-
ment strategies, and these metrics do not accurately reflect how
they perform in a larger set. A group of alphas with low IC scores
may outperform a subset composed of the highest-scoring alphas.
Thus, importance scoring techniques such as Shapley Additive ex-
Planations (SHAP) [ 17] and Local Interpretable Model-agnostic
Explanations (LIME) [ 18] measure this contribution and provide a
comprehensive understanding of alphas in conjunction with one
another.3.2.4 Alpha Deployment. In this module, three key aspects need to
be properly managed to guarantee the smooth and correct real-time
computation during online trading: 1) Dependency Management:
This involves maintaining and supervising all alpha-data inter-
dependencies to ensure sequential computation and traceability
of issues. 2) Stream-Batch Unification: Inconsistencies between
live trading and historical backtesting of alphas are unacceptable.
By adopting the Kappa Architecture, a unified real-time processing
layer is maintained. Thus, all data is processed in the same manner,
eliminating inconsistencies between batch and stream processing
during alpha generation. 3) Automatic Alpha Verification: This
is employed to validate all system-maintained alphas, monitor data
quality, and identify discrepancies. This ongoing verification en-
sures the reliability, timeliness, and accuracy of the deployed alphas.
3.3 Alpha Computation Acceleration Layer
Alpha computation requires preprocessing financial data from var-
ious sources such as price-volume data, financial statement data,
etc. Because of the computational overhead of processing high-
frequency data such as orderbook level data, computational accel-
eration plays a key role. Also, in alpha mining, billions of alphas
are calculated, making the speed of alpha calculations crucial for
effectively exploring the alpha search space. Below we outline a few
key computation acceleration techniques employed. Streaming
Algorithms: particularly beneficial in performing rolling window
computations on large time-series datasets. They incrementally
update calculations with each new data point in the window, signif-
icantly optimizing computational efficiency and memory usage for
these sliding-scale operations such as ts_corr(rolling correlation
of time-series data). Vectorized Computation: enables efficient
financial data processing by eliminating explicit loops, leveraging
hardware capabilities for concurrent processing, and optimizing
memory management. SIMD (Single Instruction, Multiple Data)
andSIMT (Single Instruction, Multiple Threads) [ 19]: allows si-
multaneous computations on multiple data points, fully exploiting
hardware capabilities. Memory Optimization : pre-allocation of
memory pool, layout optimization, and zero-copy, etc, are employed
to minimize performance loss from discontinuous memory access
and unnecessary memory allocation. Data Partitioning : Divides
large-scale data into smaller, manageable chunks for independent
processing. Multithreading : enables parallel computations on each
partition using multiple threads. This approach significantly boosts
computational speed when processing large financial datasets. GPU
Acceleration [20]: employs CUDA cores for parallel processing,
transforming CPU-bound operations into GPU-accelerated tasks
and improves performance for data-intensive computations.
4 EXPERIMENTS
We conduct experiments on Alpha-GPT with the goal of verifying
the following research questions (RQ):
•RQ1 : Can Alpha-GPT generate expressions that are consistent
with the input trading ideas?
•RQ2 : How effective is the algorithmic alpha mining layer in
enhancing the seed alphas from LLM?
•RQ3 : Can users effectively interact with Alpha-GPT to guide the
mining process?
6Table 1: Comparison of average top-20 out-of-sample IC between alphas generated by Alpha-GPT before and after search
enhancement.
Trend Discrepancy Shape RSI Momentum Mean Reversion Flow of Funds
Before search enhancement 0.01151 0.00995 0.01109 0.00951 0.01130 0.00952
After search enhancement 0.02256 0.02190 0.02527 0.02763 0.02187 0.02160
(a) Golden-cross pattern
 (b) Bollinger bands (upper breakout)
 (c) Three white soldiers
Figure 5: Trading patterns and the corresponding alphas generated by Alpha-GPT that capture them.
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Date0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0Cumulative Return
Seed alpha from the 1st round
Best performing alpha after GP in the 1st round
Best alpha generated after GP in the 2nd round
Figure 6: Backtest net values of alphas after different stages
of interactions.
•RQ4 : Can Alpha-GPT successfully explain the trading ideas be-
hind alpha expressions?
4.1 Experimental Setup
The specifications of Alpha-GPT and other relevant information
about our experiments include:
Data and operators: We use inter-day volume-price data of
stock markets. This data includes the basic candlestick chart data
(OHLCV), volume-weighted average price (VWAP), and sector data.
We also include 19 basic operators implemented in [ 21] includ-
ing time-series operations, cross-sectional operations, group-wise
operations and basic element-wise operations.
Knowledge Library: We construct the knowledge library based
on the alphas proposed in [ 2]. For each alpha, we first decompose
it into sub-expressions and explain them. Then we explain the com-
bination of these sub-expressions to form the whole trading idea.
Trading idea: Flow of FundsAlpha: div(cwise_mul(cwise_max(minus(close,shift(close, 1)), 0),amount, cwise_mul(close, volume)))Explanation: This expression calculates the ratio between the inflow of funds on days where the price increased and the product of the closing price and the trading volume of the current day. This ratio represents the intensity of the inflow of funds relative to the trading value.Trading idea: Volume-price correlationAlpha: zscore_scale(ts_corr(close, volume, 20))Explanation: This alpha expression aims to capture the correlation between the daily close prices and the trading volume. A high positive correlation may indicate increased trading activity and potentially signal a price trend. The z-score scaling further helps identify extreme or outlier correlation values.Trading idea: ShadowAlpha:div(cwise_max(minus(high,open),minus(high,close)),minus(high,low))Explanation: The trading idea behind this alpha expression is to identify situations where the upper shadow of a candlestick is relatively large compared to the entire range of the candlestick. This can indicate potential selling pressure or resistance at higher price levels.Trading idea: MomentumAlpha: ts_delta(ts_rank(div(ts_delta(close,1),close),10),1)Explanation: This alpha expression calculates the time series delta between the current value and the previous value of the rank of the ratio between the time series delta of the daily closing price and the current closing price over a period of 10 days. The trading idea is to capture the change in the ranking of stocks based on the relative price changes, which can provide insights into shifts in market sentiment or price momentum.Figure 7: Alphas generated based on trading ideas and the
corresponding explanations generated by Alpha-GPT.
Document embeddings are indexed via Faiss1. Note that we only
employed external memory when generating alphas for trading
ideas that align well with those in [2].
LLM and Adapter: For natural language interaction, we use
OpenAI’s chat completion API with “gpt-3.5-turbo-16k-0613” model
base. For the embedding model used in knowledge retrieval, we use
OpenAI’s “text-ada-embedding-002” API with embedding dimen-
sion of 1536. The LLM generates a batch of alphas at a time, and
will be asked to correct alphas with syntax or semantic errors.
Alpha searching and evaluation: Alphas are searched by the
genetic programming model with a fitness score defined by the
Information Coefficient (IC). We evaluate the performance of those
alphas on out-of-sample criteria such as IC, annual return, Sharpe
ratio, etc.
1https://github.com/facebookresearch/faiss
74.2 Idea-Formula Consistency
We first demonstrate that Alpha-GPT can generate formulaic alphas
that are consistent with the user’s given trading idea. Figure 5
illustrates three alpha expressions generated based on given trading
ideas and their correspondence to the patterns in the candlestick
chart. The candlestick chart is plotted from the weekly data of the
S&P500 index from 2020 to 2023.
The first trading idea aims to capture golden cross patterns.
The alpha value reflects the divergence between the fast and slow
moving average curves. The second trading idea characterizes the
breakout signals of Bollinger bands, and the corresponding alpha
is a binary signal that gets activated when the upper bound is
crossed. The third trading idea aims to capture three consecutive
bullish movements on the candlestick chart, and the generated alpha
successfully identified those patterns. These examples demonstrate
that the generated alphas correctly capture the trading ideas.
4.3 Search Enhancement
Table 1 compares the out-of-sample IC of alphas before and after
search enhancement by the algorithmic alpha mining layer on 7
different trading ideas. We can see that search enhancement signif-
icantly improves the performance of Alpha-GPT and is critical in
the Alpha-GPT workflow.
4.4 Human-AI Interaction
Figure 6 illustrates the backtest curve of the alpha generated through-
out the human-AI interaction. The backtest is conducted on US
stock data from 2012 to 2021. The initial trading idea is to char-
acterize the long-short imbalance. After several rounds of search
enhancement and user interaction, the backtest performance of the
resulting alphas significantly improved. More details about these
interactions are present in the UI example in Figure 3.
4.5 Alpha Explanation
Figure 7 presents examples of alpha expressions generated by Alpha-
GPT based on given trading ideas, and the corresponding natural
language explanations of these alphas also generated by Alpha-
GPT. From these examples we can see that Alpha-GPT can provide
appropriate explanations of the generated alphas, relieving the
burden of human researchers to interpret these expressions by
themselves.
5 RELATED WORK
A lot of algorithms have been studied for formulaic alpha min-
ing. Examples include Monte Carlo random search, Markov-chain
Monte Carlo [ 22], genetic programming [ 23] and their variants
[3], and reinforcement learning [ 24]. However, these methods all
require the user to directly define the algorithmic configurations,
providing limited interactivity compared with Alpha-GPT. Mean-
while, LLMs such as GPT [ 25] have demonstrated emergent abilities
[26] and achieved superior performance on various tasks. Besides,
LLMs have also shown great reasoning [ 27,28] and planning capa-
bilities [ 29]. In this way, an LLM can be regarded as a core thinking
module and be integrated with various peripheral tools [ 30] to form
intelligent LLM-powered agents [31].6 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we propose a new paradigm and a new system for
alpha mining by leveraging the power of large language models. Fur-
ther study on prompt engineering, LLM fine-tuning, alpha search
algorithms, and knowledge library construction can be conducted
to improve the capability of this system.
REFERENCES
[1]Igor Tulchinsky. Introduction to Alpha Design. In Finding Alphas , pages 1–6.
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2019.
[2]Zura Kakushadze. 101 Formulaic Alphas. arXiv:1601.00991 [q-fin] , March 2016.
arXiv: 1601.00991.
[3]Tianping Zhang, Yuanqi Li, Yifei Jin, and Jian Li. AutoAlpha: an Efficient Hi-
erarchical Evolutionary Algorithm for Mining Alpha Factors in Quantitative
Investment, April 2020. arXiv:2002.08245 [q-fin].
[4]Andrew W. Lo, Harry Mamaysky, and Jiang Wang. Foundations of Tech-
nical Analysis: Computational Algorithms, Statistical Inference, and Empiri-
cal Implementation. The Journal of Finance , 55(4):1705–1765, 2000. _eprint:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/0022-1082.00265.
[5]R.N. Elliott and R.R. Prechter. R.N. Elliott’s Masterworks: The Definitive Collection .
New Classics Library, 2005.
[6]Jian Guo, Saizhuo Wang, Lionel M. Ni, and Heung-Yeung Shum. Quant 4.0: Engi-
neering Quantitative Investment with Automated, Explainable and Knowledge-
driven Artificial Intelligence, December 2022. arXiv:2301.04020 [cs, q-fin].
[7]slundberg/shap: A game theoretic approach to explain the output of any machine
learning model.
[8]Yufei Wu, Daniele Magazzeni, and Manuela Veloso. How Robust are Limit
Order Book Representations under Data Perturbation? In ICML Workshop on
Representation Learning for Finance and E-Commerce Applications , 2021.
[9] Fully Sharded Data Parallel: faster AI training with fewer GPUs, July 2021.
[10] Sewon Min, Xinxi Lyu, Ari Holtzman, Mikel Artetxe, Mike Lewis, Hannaneh
Hajishirzi, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Rethinking the Role of Demonstrations: What
Makes In-Context Learning Work?, October 2022. arXiv:2202.12837 [cs].
[11] Pengfei Liu, Weizhe Yuan, Jinlan Fu, Zhengbao Jiang, Hiroaki Hayashi, and Gra-
ham Neubig. Pre-train, Prompt, and Predict: A Systematic Survey of Prompting
Methods in Natural Language Processing, July 2021. arXiv:2107.13586 [cs].
[12] Paul F. Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom B. Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario
Amodei. Deep Reinforcement Learning from Human Preferences. In Isabelle
Guyon, Ulrike von Luxburg, Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach, Rob Fergus, S. V. N.
Vishwanathan, and Roman Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 30: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
2017, December 4-9, 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA , pages 4299–4307, 2017.
[13] Samyam Rajbhandari, Jeff Rasley, Olatunji Ruwase, and Yuxiong He. ZeRO: Mem-
ory Optimizations Toward Training Trillion Parameter Models. arXiv:1910.02054
[cs, stat] , May 2020. arXiv: 1910.02054.
[14] Song Han, Huizi Mao, and William J. Dally. Deep Compression: Compressing
Deep Neural Network with Pruning, Trained Quantization and Huffman Coding.
In Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun, editors, 4th International Conference on Learn-
ing Representations, ICLR 2016, San Juan, Puerto Rico, May 2-4, 2016, Conference
Track Proceedings , 2016.
[15] Selim Amrouni, Aymeric Moulin, Jared Vann, Svitlana Vyetrenko, Tucker Balch,
and Manuela Veloso. ABIDES-Gym: Gym Environments for Multi-Agent Discrete
Event Simulation and Application to Financial Markets. In Proceedings of the
Second ACM International Conference on AI in Finance , ICAIF ’21, New York, NY,
USA, 2021. Association for Computing Machinery.
[16] Aristides Gionis, Piotr Indyk, and Rajeev Motwani. Similarity Search in High
Dimensions via Hashing. In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on
Very Large Data Bases , VLDB ’99, pages 518–529, San Francisco, CA, USA, 1999.
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.
[17] Scott M Lundberg and Su-In Lee. A Unified Approach to Interpreting Model
Predictions. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 30.
Curran Associates, Inc., 2017.
[18] Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. "Why Should I Trust
You?": Explaining the Predictions of Any Classifier. In Proceedings of the 22nd
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining ,
KDD ’16, pages 1135–1144, New York, NY, USA, 2016. Association for Computing
Machinery.
[19] John L. Hennessy and David A. Patterson. Computer Architecture, Fifth Edition:
A Quantitative Approach . Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA,
USA, 5th edition, 2011.
[20] NVIDIA Corporation. NVIDIA CUDA C Programming Guide, 2010.
[21] Jiadong Guo, Jingshu Peng, Hang Yuan, and Lionel Ming-shuan Ni. HXPY:
A High-Performance Data Processing Package for Financial Time-Series Data.
Journal of Computer Science and Technology , 38(1):3–24, February 2023.
8[22] Ying Jin, Weilin Fu, Jian Kang, Jiadong Guo, and Jian Guo. Bayesian Symbolic
Regression, January 2020. arXiv:1910.08892 [stat].
[23] Can Cui, Wei Wang, Meihui Zhang, Gang Chen, Zhaojing Luo, and Beng Chin Ooi.
AlphaEvolve: A Learning Framework to Discover Novel Alphas in Quantitative
Investment. In Proceedings of the 2021 International Conference on Management
of Data , pages 2208–2216, Virtual Event China, June 2021. ACM.
[24] Shuo Yu, Hongyan Xue, Xiang Ao, Feiyang Pan, Jia He, Dandan Tu, and Qing He.
Generating Synergistic Formulaic Alpha Collections via Reinforcement Learning,
May 2023. arXiv:2306.12964 [cs, q-fin].
[25] Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan,
Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan,
Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter,
Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Ben-
jamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford,
Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language Models are Few-Shot Learners.
arXiv:2005.14165 [cs] , July 2020. arXiv: 2005.14165.
[26] Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian
Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama, Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, Ed H.Chi, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Oriol Vinyals, Percy Liang, Jeff Dean, and William
Fedus. Emergent Abilities of Large Language Models. Transactions on Machine
Learning Research , June 2022.
[27] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia,
Ed H. Chi, Quoc V. Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-Thought Prompting Elicits
Reasoning in Large Language Models. May 2022.
[28] Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Thomas L. Griffiths, Yuan Cao,
and Karthik Narasimhan. Tree of Thoughts: Deliberate Problem Solving with
Large Language Models, May 2023. arXiv:2305.10601 [cs].
[29] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R. Narasimhan,
and Yuan Cao. ReAct: Synergizing Reasoning and Acting in Language Models.
September 2022.
[30] Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli,
Luke Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language
Models Can Teach Themselves to Use Tools, February 2023. arXiv:2302.04761
[cs].
[31] Lilian Weng. LLM Powered Autonomous Agents, June 2023. Section: posts.
9